INTRODUCTION
Homeopathy is a holistic form of complementary medicine, aiming to treat the whole person 
rather than just the physical symptoms. It works on the principle that the mind and body 
are so strongly linked that physical conditions cannot be successfully treated without an 
understanding of the person’s constitution and character. 
Whereas in conventional medicine, people diagnosed with the same condition will 
generally be given the same medicine, in homeopathy the remedy given to a patient may 
depend on a whole host of other factors, such as temperament, state of mind, and lifestyle. 
The key to the practice of homeopathy is the ability to understand and interpret the patient’s 
symptoms—the outward signs of internal disorder—both before and after a remedy is given. 
This continuing relationship helps to make homeopaths particularly effective at discovering 
the underlying causes of frequently recurring ailments.
Homeopathy’s safe, gentle approach complies with one of the most important rules of 
medical intervention—namely , that it should do no harm. Many common, everyday ailments 
may be treated safely and effectively at home using homeopathic remedies; should the 
common ailment develop into something worse, however—a cold into a chest infection, for 
instance—then a conventional doctor must be consulted. In general, a conventional doctor 
should be consulted for any ailment that can be quickly and effectively treated by 
conventional medicine, or for any condition that requires conventional investigation. 
Certain serious ailments may also be alleviated using homeopathic remedies, but in the 
treatment of these conditions, the experience of a qualified homeopathic practitioner is 
essential from the outset.
My aim in this book has been to give a wide-ranging and comprehensive account of 
homeopathy that is easy for the layperson to understand and use. With several hundred 
homeopathic remedies available, choosing the right ones is obviously a complex matter. 
I have included more than 320 remedies and a great many ailments. Those in the serious 
ailments section should under no circumstances be considered for self-treatment but always 
referred to a homeopathic practitioner. With their accompanying case histories, the inclusion 
of these serious conditions is intended to give the reader a greater insight into the way a 
homeopathic practitioner might approach particular problems and how consultations can 
help unlock a case and provide an understanding of how the illness has developed.
For this book, a great deal of research has been carried out into the scientific 
classifications of the substances from which remedies are made, in order to correct the 
various errors and confusions that have crept in over the past 200 years. Thus, this book is 
currently the most scientifically accurate and up-to-date publication available on homeopathy . 
I have used current biological, zoological, and mineralogical classifications where possible, 

which has meant that some Latin names in this book differ from those to be found in 
earlier homeopathic textbooks. The remedies are listed in alphabetical order according 
to these Latin names in the materia medica. 
It is a truism that no one system of medicine can cure every illness every time in 
every patient. However, an integrated approach to medicine can provide a flexible and 
pragmatic approach to healthcare, and homeopathy has an important role to play in this 
process. In many countries, conventionally trained doctors are already turning 
increasingly to complementary therapies such as homeopathy to widen the range of 
treatments available to them.
To some extent, this is a response by the medical profession to the wishes of a 
growing number of patients, who would like to take more responsibility for their own 
health. More and more people want to understand what they can do themselves to 
prevent illness and, if they do become ill, to understand the causes of their illness and 
determine how they can help themselves recover. Homeopathy offers a simple, effective, 
relatively inexpensive, and extremely safe way of accomplishing this, provided it is 
practiced with common sense.
Introduction to updated edition 
Homeopathy is far more than just a different set of “pills” for everyday ills. It provides a 
language for diagnosis and a range of approaches to health. This book provides the 
information necessary to use homeopathy to treat many every day illnesses by focusing 
on the cause and the presenting symptoms. Central to this is an understanding of the 
homeopathic remedies themselves.  The clear descriptions and illustrations in this book 
make the exploration of homeopathy and its medicines a delight and bring accurate use 
of homeopathy for minor ailments into the home. In addition, more serious conditions 
are described, and the way homeopathy can play a part in the holistic management of 
these conditions is explored. In this book, Andrew Lockie has provided an excellent and 
straightforward introduction and overview of this broad subject. We, like Dr. Lockie, 
believe that many more people can access both the benefits of homeopathy and the 
wonders of the remedies through this book.



Solanum dulcamara
DULCAMARA
 REMEDY PROFILE 
  Dulcamara  is typically given to people who are 
sensitive to cold and damp, with symptoms 
caused by rapid temperature changes or cold, 
wet weather . 
 In the symptom picture for  Dulcamara , 
these physical factors outweigh psychological  
traits, but some confusion, irritability , 
impatience, and restlessness may be evident, 
possibly with a domineering attitude, notably  
towar d family members.  
 Susceptibility to respiratory infections 
causing thick, yellow mucus is typical. Hay 
fever and other allergic reactions are also 
common, as are head and joint pain, eczema, 
and diarrhea. 
  Colds & coughs 
  SYMPTOMS  Sore throat, with a thick, yellow 
discharge from the nose and the eyes. Thick 
mucus may be due to sinusitis, as may 
painful pressure and congestion in the head.  
A stiff neck is common, perhaps with back 
and limb pain. There may also be 
conjunctivitis, a rattling cough, bronchitis,  
or even pneumonia.  
  Symptoms better  For warmth; for dry, settled 
weather; for movement. 
  Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather; 
at night.  
  Hay fever & asthma 
  SYMPTOMS  Nasal congestion, with profuse,  
watery dischar ge from the eyes and 
constricted breathing. Exposure to animal 
fur, grass pollen, dust mites, and other  allergens may aggravate the severity  
of symptoms.  
  Symptoms better  For warmth; for dry, 
settled weather; for movement. 
  Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather; 
at night.  
  Head & facial pain 
  SYMPTOMS  Pain in a specific part of the head, 
or with a sensation of heaviness, nausea, or 
confusion. Neuralgic face pain, perhaps 
caused by Bell’s palsy, may be treated, or 
pain due to sinusitis  (see left) . 
  Symptoms better  For dry, fine weather; 
for keeping still; for expelling catarrh. 
  Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather; 
in winter .  
  Skin conditions 
  SYMPTOMS  Thickened, crusty , itchy skin, 
notably on the scalp, which bleeds when  
scratched.  Dulcamara  is also used to treat 
urticaria (hives) brought on by sweating in 
humid conditions; large, flat, smooth warts, 
especially on the palms of the hands; 
and ringworm, often found on the scalps 
of children. 
  Symptoms better  For warmth; for dry weather . 
  Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather; 
befor e menstr uation.  
  Diarr hea 
  SYMPTOMS  Slimy , yellow or green stools,  
maybe with traces of blood. There may be 
nausea, and pain before passing stools.  
In children, symptoms may be triggered 
during teething.   KEY SYMPTOMS    conditions that are affected by weather changes from 
hot to cold   • domineering nature   • sensitivity to cold and damp   
• asthma   • urticaria in humid conditions  MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
 SOURCE DET AILS 
  ORIGIN 
 Native to nor th Africa, Eur ope, and nor thern 
Asia, and naturalized in Nor th America. 
Grows in moist, shady soil.  
  BACKGROUND 
 Has a long histor y of use as an anti-
inﬂ ammator y and a liver tonic. Stem extracts 
have been used for war ts and eczema.  
  PREP ARATION 
 Fresh gr een stems and leaves ar e picked 
just befor e the plant ﬂ  owers, then ﬁ  nely 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
  
  COMMON NAMES 
 Nightshade, woody nightshade, bitter 
nightshade, felonwor t.  
 See also  Sever e eczema,   page 194 ; Sore throat,  page 226   Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement. 
  Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for rest.  
  Joint pain 
  SYMPTOMS  Stiffness and pain in joints, 
aggravated by damp.  
  Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement. 
  Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for 
extremes of temperatur e; for inactivity .  Since the time of ancient Rome, nightshade has been  
used to treat a wide range of ailments. One such 
ailment, abscesses called “felons” on the fingertips,  
inspired one of the plant ’s common names, felonwort. The 
18th-century Swedish naturalist Carolus Linnaeus prescribed the 
plant to treat fever and inflammatory infections. The homeopathic  
remedy , proved in 1811 by Hahnemann, is traditionally associated  
with people who are highly susceptible to damp and chills.Leaves and twigs are 
used herbally to treat 
skin problems
Leaves and unripe 
berries are most 
toxic parts of plant
NIGHTSHADE    A stimulant, diuretic, and 
antirheumatic plant, nightshade is highly toxic and 
therefore generally used only by trained herbalists.  •171 MINOR REMEDIES
 Valeriana officinalis 
 VALERIANA 
   COMMON NAME   Common valerian.  
  ORIGIN   Native to Europe and norther n Asia, 
and cultivated in central Europe.  
  BACKGROUND   Once known as “all-heal,” 
valerian has been used since the time 
of ancient Rome for anxiety , insomnia, 
and high blood pressure. In World 
War I the tincture was widely used 
for shell shock.  
  PREP ARATION   The fresh root is unearthed and 
macerated in alcohol.   
  Remedy profile 
 Those with a nervous, irritable, restless, 
and mentally or emotionally unstable state 
of mind respond best to  Valeriana . It is 
used for an extreme nervous state possibly 
characteri zed by hysteria, raving, swearing, 
and madness, accompanied by a sensation 
of dreaming or floating. Fluctuating mood 
swings that alternate between extreme joy 
and deepest grief are typically linked 
to this remedy . 
 Physically ,  Valeriana  is associated with 
neuralgic pains, a rapid pulse, and blood 
congestion in the head. Pains tend to be 
darting and tearing, alternating between 
the upper and lower limbs. The limbs feel 
painful, heavy , and difficult to move, and 
may jerk on resting. Headaches tend to 
develop slowly , in spurts, or suddenly , 
as if caused by a blow to the head. 
   Symptoms better  For changing position; 
for walking around; for sleep; for sweating. 
  Symptoms worse  In the early afternoon; 
in the late evening; at rest; for standing 
or sitting still; for excitement; for fasting.   
 Veratrum viride 
 VERA TRUM VIR. 
   COMMON NAME   American white hellebore.  
  ORIGIN   Found throughout northwester n 
North America.  
  BACKGROUND   Although once used as a herbal 
remedy by the Iroquois and Cher okee 
Indians, this highly toxic plant is now little 
used in herbal medicine.  
  PREP ARATION   The fresh root is gathered in fall 
and macerated in alcohol.   
  Remedy profile 
 People who respond best to this remedy 
are often restless, quarrelsome, and prone 
to complaining. 
  Veratrum vir.  has a strong affinity with lung 
conditions such as asthma, pleurisy , and pneumonia. Symptoms appear rapidly , 
including a strong or slow pulse, high fever, 
anxiety , and vomiting. There may be a red 
streak in the center of the tongue. 
 Another rapid-onset condition for which 
 Veratrum vir.  is given is intense fever with 
twitching, especially during sleep, spasms, 
delirium, chorea (involuntar y , random, jerky 
movements), or even manic behavior or 
puerperal fever (infection in the genital tract 
after miscarriage, an abortion, or childbirth). 
Violent, rapidly appearing headaches 
may occur , with a bursting, 
congested sensation in the head, 
as if it contains too much blood. 
   Symptoms better  For rubbing the affected 
area; for lying with the head held low; for hot, 
strong coffee. 
  Symptoms worse  For cold; for the heat of 
the sun; for rising; for movement; for lying 
on the back; after childbir th; for suppr essed 
menstr uation, possibly caused by jet lag.   
 Verbascum thapsiforme 
 VERBASCUM 
   COMMON NAMES   Great mullein, Aaron’s rod.  
  ORIGIN   Native to central and souther n Europe 
and wester n Asia.  
  BACKGROUND   Greek mythology relates that 
Odysseus used great mullein to protect 
himself from Circe, and in the Middle Ages 
it was thought to be magical. Today it is 
generally used in herbalism for coughs.  
  PREP ARATION   The fresh aerial parts in flower , 
excluding the woody parts, are finely 
chopped and steeped in alcohol.   
  Remedy profile 
  Verbascum  is of most benefit to those who 
are apathetic, lazy, and easily distracted by 
the varied thoughts that crowd upon them. 
The symptoms treated by  Verbascum  are 
often associated with painful neuralgic 
conditions, particularly of the facial area. 
T ypical symptoms include neuralgic pains in 
the face and teeth, especially on the left side, 
with severe pain in the cheekbones. 
Irritation and inflammation of the bladder , 
ears, or respirator y tract may also be eased 
by the remedy . 
 In addition,  Verbascum  is given for painful 
colds with profuse dischar ge, watery eyes, 
and a sensation of the ears having been 
blocked up. The chest may be congested 
with catarrh, and the voice may be deep and 
hoarse. Coughs tend to sound hollow , deep, 
and hoarse, and occur mainly at night. An 
intake of breath may cause the coughing to 
die down.    Symptoms better  For rising from sitting; for 
taking a deep breath. 
  Symptoms worse  For drafts; for changes in 
temperatur e; for touch; for talking or reading 
aloud; for biting hard.  
   See also  Neuralgia,   page 268    
 Vespa crabr o 
 VESP A 
   COMMON NAME   European hornet  .
  ORIGIN   Native to Europe.  
  BACKGROUND   The female hornet has a severe 
sting, but it is rarely fatal.  
  PREP ARATION   The whole, live insect is steeped 
in alcohol, diluted, and succussed.   
  Remedy profile 
 People for whom  Vespa  is best suited 
are prone to insomnia, often due to 
anxiety . Their nerves and muscles 
are often sensitive. 
 Red, swollen skin complaints and 
disor ders of the female reproductive organs 
are usually treated with  Vespa . Typical skin 
symptoms include sore, stinging boils, 
raised, itchy bumps and weals, and itchy, 
lentil-shaped spots. Stinging, burning 
pains, as if the body is being pierced by 
something sharp, are another symptom 
associated with this remedy . 
  Vespa  is also used for mucous 
membrane problems and complaints  
associated with menstruation, such 
as premenstrual depression, pain, 
and constipation. 
   Symptoms better  For washing the hands in 
cold water; for bathing the affected area 
with vinegar . 
  Symptoms worse  For closed, stuffy 
surroundings; for being by a source of 
direct heat.   
        VESP A CRABRO  
(European hornet)
186 •
  Symptoms 
  • Heart feels as though it is beating harder or 
faster than usual. 
 • Fluttering or thumping in the chest, with 
an alarming sensation as though the heart has 
stopped beating. 
 • Possible faintness and breathlessness.    
 Causes 
 Heartbeat is contr olled by the autonomic 
nervous system. If nerve impulses are disrupted, 
the heart will continue beating, but at its own, 
usually slower rate. The most common form of 
palpitation —usually experienced at rest—is 
caused by ectopic heartbeats, when a premature 
beat is followed by an unusually long pause. 
This feels like a thumping or fluttering in the 
chest, and is not usually indicative of heart 
disease. It is caused by stimulants —for example 
large amounts of caffeine or heavy smoking. 
Palpitations with an irregular heartbeat may be 
symptomatic of heart disease. They may also be 
caused by an overactive thyroid gland, high 
fever, food allergy, and certain recreational drugs, 
such as amphetamines or cocaine. Palpitations 
may be a side-ef fect of some prescribed drugs, 
particularly those that regulate blood pressure, 
or they may be triggered by anxiety .   
 Conventional care 
 Treatment depends on the underlying 
cause. Investigations may include 24-hour 
electr ocardiograms (ECGs) to explore the level 
of electrical activity in the heart, and thyroid-
function tests to identify gland disor ders. 
Appropriate drug therapy will follow . In extreme 
cases, a normal heart rhythm may have to be re-
established using cardioversion (electric shocks).   
 Homeopathic medicine 
 In addition to an individual ’s medical histor y , a 
homeopath will consider emotional state, any 
local aggravating factors, such as the effects of 
cold air or physical exhaustion, and food 
preferences. Prescription of constitutional 
remedies will be largely determined by specific 
symptoms   (see page 18) , but some remedies SERIOUS AILMENTS
PALPIT ATION S
“Palpitations ” is the term used to describe a general awareness that the heart is 
beating, or the sensation that it is beating irregularl y , or faster , or with more force 
than it should, given the level of exertion. Not all palpitations indicate a serious 
condition, but they should be investigated. The heart normally beats at a rate of 
about 70 beats a minute.
have an affinity with the heart.  Agaricus  is 
associated with heart irregularities induced by 
stimulants.  Apis  is indicated for organic heart 
disease accompanied by fluid retention.  China  is 
associated with nervous exhaustion.  Conium  is 
effective for an incompetent mitral valve, and 
 Kali. carb.  is indicated if there are associated 
respiratory problems such as asthma. Other 
remedies include  Argentum nit. ,  Aurum met. ,  
Calc. carb. ,  Lachesis ,  Nat. mur. ,  Nux vomica ,  
Phosphorus ,  Sepia , and  Sulphur . 
 Acute attacks are also treated accor ding to 
specific symptoms. Remedies include  Aconite , 
if onset is sudden, especially after shock, 
with a fear of dying; and  Nux vomica , if 
palpitations result from overindulgence, or 
if there is physical and mental exhaustion 
with overar ousal from doing too much, 
chilliness, and irritability .   Digitalis  is given for 
palpitations preceding a feeling as though the 
heart has stopped, with a fear that the least 
movement might make it stop again; and 
 Lachesis  is prescribed for menopausal women 
who feel faint and anxious, and complain of 
a constricted feeling in the chest.   
 Lifestyle  
 Smoking is inadvisable, and those who consume 
large amounts of caffeine should reduce their 
intake. The diet should be low in fat and refined 
carbohydrates, and high in oily fish and 
vegetarian proteins. A nutritionist can advise 
about possible food allergy, but it is worth 
eliminating suspected triggers from the diet. 
Plenty of rest, sleep, and relaxation techniques 
or meditation are advisable. Time-management 
techniques can help to reduce stress levels.   CASE HISTORY 
 Clare, a cr edit contr oller, age 37, had 
a two-month histor y of palpitations. She 
described thuds in her chest—thr ee a 
minute or one ever y two minutes—at any 
time of day . She had cut out caf feine and 
increased the amount of oats in her diet, 
but neither helped. She felt worse for 
stress. An ECG was nor mal. She had been 
referred to a car diologist, and pr escribed 
a beta blocker , which helped a good deal. 
She was taking an oral contraceptive and 
was a nonsmoker . 
  
PERSONAL DETAILS 
 Clare was a ner vous person, concer ned 
about what others wer e thinking and, 
in her view , not tough enough. She 
was easily of fended, but bottled up 
her feelings. She r esented what she 
consider ed to be bad tr eatment by her 
mother-in-law .  
  
FOOD PREFERENCES 
 Clare liked sweet foods, vinegar , and spices, 
and especially chocolate and carbonated 
drinks. She disliked herbal teas.  
  
GENERAL DETAILS 
 Clare was better for sun and heat. She slept 
six hours a night and awoke unr efreshed. 
She complained of a poor memor y, a lack 
of ener gy since puber ty, split ends, brittle 
nails, cold extr emities, and loose bowel 
movements when she was anxious.  
  
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP 
 On her ﬁ rst visit Clar e was given  Staphisagria , 
and it was suggested that she write a letter to her mother-in-law airing her grievances, 
but that she did not mail it. She was also 
advised not to take the contraceptive pill. 
By her next visit, four weeks later , the 
cardiologist had conﬁ rmed that ther e was 
no hear t disease. The palpitations wer e less 
frequent and less sever e, and Clar e’s ener gy 
levels wer e higher . She was put on mineral 
supplements and seen a month later . She 
had not had any palpitations, felt much less stressed, and was sleeping better , although 
she was r estless, and had become insecur e 
and fastidious. She had also developed a 
craving for fats. After being pr escribed  Arsen. 
alb. , Clare had no fur ther problems. She now 
takes no medication other than the 
contraceptive pill.  CAUTION
 • If palpitations ar e accompanied by 
chest pain, br eathing dif ﬁ culties, 
dizziness, sweating, or fainting, see 
a doctor immediately . 
 • If palpitations last for several hours, or 
recur over several days, consult a doctor . 

•9 HOW TO USE THIS BOOKHOW TO USE THIS BOOK
HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
Arranged in chart form, this section covers  
a wide range of minor and acute physical, 
mental, and emotional ailments that may 
respond well to self-help measures. General 
conditions are organized by body system. 
Sections on specific ailments that are 
prevalent at particular stages of life follow, 
along with a first-aid section.
1 SECTION TITLE  Body system or life stage  
to which ailments typically belong.
2 INTRODUCTION  Body-system or life-stage 
context for the ailments in the section, and the 
potential of homeopathy for treating them.
3 DISORDER  Symptoms of the ailment,  
along with causes, contributing factors,  
and possible wider implications for health. 
Additional self-help measures are also listed, 
as well as cautionary advice. 
4 SPECIFIC AILMENT  Brief description of  
a particular key symptom that may be 
associated with the disorder.
5 PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS  Details of the 
particular profile of physical symptoms associated with the specific ailment.
6 PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS  Details of  
the particular psychological symptoms 
associated with the specific ailment.
7 SYMPTOMS BETTER/WORSE  External  
or internal factors that may cause the particular combination of symptoms  
to improve or deteriorate.
8 REMEDY & DOSAGE  The appropriate  
remedy for the set of symptoms, along  
with the recommended dosage and the 
duration of treatment.
SAFETY ISSUES
In addition to the specific cautions listed in 
the ailments sections, you should check the 
general cautions below and the red-light 
symptoms ( see right ) before attempting to 
treat yourself homeopathically . Unless 
otherwise stated, treatments recommended 
are for homeopathic remedies only; they do 
not advocate ingestion or application of the 
actual plants, minerals, or animals from 
which the remedy is made. 
General cautions
• Consult a conventional doctor immediately 
if you have any of the red-light symptoms  
(see right ).
• See a conventional doctor if there is no 
improvement within two to three weeks  
(48 hours in children under five) or if 
symptoms get worse. 
• Do not stop taking any prescribed 
conventional medication without first 
consulting a conventional doctor. 
• Tell your homeopath about any prescribed 
conventional medication you are taking,  
and any other complementary treatments  
you are receiving. 
• Tell a conventional doctor about any 
homeopathic remedies you are taking.
• Always check with a conventional  
doctor before embarking on any course  of complementary treatment if you have  
any existing, chronic medical conditions  
or symptoms of illness.
• Do not embark on any program of  
vigorous exercise without first consulting  
a conventional doctor if you have any  
serious medical condition, such as high  
blood pressure or a heart condition, or 
if you are pregnant.
• Do not begin a course of homeopathic 
treatment without first consulting a 
conventional doctor if you are trying  
to conceive or are already pregnant.• Do not use any herbal or aromatherapy 
products during the first three months of 
pregnancy or if breast-feeding unless 
supervised by an herbal practitioner.
• If in any doubt about administering 
homeopathic treatments to children under  
12 who have a chronic medical condition,  
or who are taking conventional drugs,  
consult a doctor or a medically qualified 
homeopathic practitioner.
• Do not exceed the recommended dosage  
of any nutritional supplements without 
professional supervision.
CAUTION
Consult a conventional doctor immediately for: 
• Chest pain or breathing difﬁculties; if there 
is acute pain in the chest, arms, jaw, or 
throat, call 911 .
• Unexplained dizziness.
• Persistent hoarseness, cough, or sore throat.
• Difﬁculty in swallowing.
• Persistent abdominal pain or indigestion.
• Coughing up of blood.
• Persistent, unexplained weight loss or fatigue.
• A mole that changes shape, size, or color, 
or itches or bleeds.
• Change in bowel or bladder habits.
• Passing of blood in the stools.• Vaginal bleeding between menstrual 
periods, after sexual intercourse, or after the 
menopause, or unusual vaginal discharge.
• Thickening of a breast, formation of a lump 
in a breast, or change in the shape or size of 
a breast; discharge or bleeding from a nipple.
• A lump in a testicle, or change in size or 
shape of a testicle; persistent failure to get 
an erection.
• Severe headaches; persistent one-sided 
headaches; visual disturbances.
• A sore or swelling that does not heal.
• Frequent and persistent back pain.
• Unexplained leg pain and swelling.1
2
3
8
4 5 6 7224 • •225
RESPIRA TOR Y SYSTEM
With every breath we take, spores, viruses, bacteria, 
and microscopic particles of dust, smoke, and chemical 
pollutants enter the body. The nose moistens, warms, and 
filters air before it is drawn into the airway and lungs   (see page 180) . The respiratory system is therefore highly 
susceptible to the effects of atmospheric irritants. If the 
immune system is strong, it is able to ward off all but the 
most virulent infections. Colds, coughs, and influenza strike HOMEOP ATHIC SELF-HELP RESPIRA TORY SYSTEM
  HAY FEVER & ALLERGIC RHINITIS 
 Seasonal airbor ne irritants such as grass, tree, and ﬂ ower pollen cause 
the aller gic reaction that is called hay fever . Mucous membranes lining 
the nose and eyes are mainly af fected, but the ears, thr oat, and lungs 
may also become irritated. Symptoms include repeated sneezing, a 
runny nose, watering eyes, and itching of the eyes, nose, palate, and throat. Aller gic rhinitis, or perennial rhinitis, is the name given to 
similar symptoms that occur year -round and are caused by other 
irritants, including dust mites and animal dander . 
  SELF-HELP   Avoid all known ir ritants. If symptoms ar e sever e, try using 
air ﬁ  lters or ionizers in the home. We ar sunglasses and a hat when 
outdoors to shade your face. Eat lots of fr esh, raw fr uits and 
vegetables. Blow the nose gently; har d blowing may burst pollen 
grains in the nose and incr ease ir ritation. Rub a small dab of 
petroleum jelly inside each nostril a few times a day to pr event 
the nose fr om becoming dr y and sor e. Take combination H tissue  
salts  (see page 216) .   
  COLDS 
 Colds are caused by viral infections of the respiratory tract. Early 
symptoms include a sore thr oat, watery catarrh, and sneezing. As 
a cold runs its course, the catarrh thickens and may become yellow 
in color . Colds are usually self-limiting, but a neglected cold may 
develop into a chest infection such as br onchitis  (see page 228) , or 
infection may spread to the ear s  (see page 222) , sinuses  (see page 
226) , throat  (see page 226) , or larynx   (see page 228) . Vulnerability 
to infection is increased by overwork and exhaustion, emotional 
stress —especially after a shock or a fright —and anxiety . 
  SELF-HELP   Rest and drink plenty of ﬂ  uids, especially hot water mixed 
with fr esh lemon juice and a little honey . Eat plenty of fr esh fr uits 
and vegetables, and get some fr esh air . Take combination Q tissue  
salts  (see page 216) .  
  CAUTION   If ther e is pain in the thr oat, lar ynx, chest, sinuses, or ears, 
consult a doctor .   
  INFLUENZA 
 There are many dif ferent strains of the in ﬂ uenza virus, and the 
symptoms include fever , muscular aches and pains, headache, sore 
throat, and cough. Children, the elderly , smokers, and people with 
chronic diseases are the most likely to be seriously af fected by it. 
  SELF-HELP   Rest and drink fr equently , especially hot water mixed with 
fresh lemon juice and a little honey . Eat plenty of fr esh fr uits and 
vegetables, and take combination Q tissue salts   (see page 216) . 
    CAUTION   If fever persists for four days, see a doctor .      •  Streaming, bur ning catar rh that may star t in 
the left nostril and move to the right, and that 
makes the nostrils and upper lip sor e 
  •  Pain in the for ehead 
  •  Larynx feels as if it has hooks sticking in it 
  •  Eyes str eam with a bland dischar ge  
   •  Thick, honey-color ed catar rh follows 3 or 
4 days of continuous, violent sneezing  
  •  Nostrils ar e sore, red, and painful  
  •  Burning thr oat and ir ritating cough  
   •  Eyes ar e swollen and sensitive to bright light 
  •  Thick, bur ning dischar ge from the eyes that 
irritates the skin on the cheeks beneath  
  •  Bland catar rh from the nose  
  •  Catar rh drips down the back of the thr oat  
   •  Mouth feels hot 
  •  Throat is inﬂ  amed 
  •  Mild fever 
  •  Nose may bleed  
   •  Chilliness  
  •  Runny nose by day , blocked nose by night 
  •  Watering eyes and sneezing 
  •  Headache  
  •  Sore throat  
   •  Violent sneezing and thin catar rh resembling  
the white of a raw egg 
  •  Possible blocked nose 
  •  Possible cold sor es  
   •  Chills r unning up and down the spine  
  •  Shakiness and tr embling, mainly in the legs  
  •  Bursting headache that is better for urinating 
  •  Fever with lack of thirst and fatigue     •  Sore throat  
   •  High fever that comes on suddenly  
  •  Flushed face    
•  Bright re d, sor e throat 
  •  Wide, staring eyes      •  None apar t from ir ritability due 
to discomfor t of symptoms   
   •  Restlessness  
  •  Anxiety and wor ry 
  •  Possible hyperactivity in childr en  
   •  None apar t from ir ritability due 
to discomfor t of symptoms   
   •  Fear of losing touch with friends  
  •  Talkativeness  
  •  Excitability   
   •  Irritability  
  •  Over criticism of others  
   •  Desir e to be left alone 
  •  Aversion to sympathy   
   •  Appr ehension and wor ry about 
forthcoming events  
  •  Brain feels dull and dr owsy  
   •  Confusion and delirium 
  •  Horrible visions 
  •  Violent outbursts      •  In cool r ooms 
  •  In fresh air 
  •  For bathing 
  •  For movement   
   •  In the open air 
  •  For eating 
  •  For re st  
   •  When lying down in a 
darkened r oom 
  •  For cof fee  
   •  For applying cold compr esses to 
the for ehead  
  •  For gentle exer cise 
  •  For lying down  
   •  For war mth 
  •  For sleep 
  •  For applying ﬁ  rm pressur e and  
warm compr esses to the nose 
  •  In the evening  
   •  In fresh air 
  •  For fasting 
  •  For applying cold compr esses to 
the sinuses   
   •  In fresh air    •  For urinating  
  •  For applying hot compr esses to 
the back of the head and top of 
the neck   
   •  When standing or sitting up 
  •  In war m rooms     •  In war m rooms 
  •  In cold or damp weather  
  •  For war m foods and drinks  
   •  For sneezing  
  •  For war mth 
  •  In dr y weather  
   •  For war mth 
  •  In war m, windy weather 
  •  For bright light 
  •  Indoors  
  •  In the evening   
   •  For jar ring and touch 
  •  When lying on the right side 
  •  In fresh air and sun 
  •  Between 4 a.m. and 6 a.m. 
  •  When over heated but  
not perspiring   
   •  In dr y, cold wind 
  •  In public places 
  •  Between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m. 
  •  For emotional str ess 
  •  For spicy foods or stimulants   
   •  At ar ound 10 a.m. 
  •  In cold, thunder y weather  
  •  For physical or mental exer tion 
  •  In drafts, sea air , or hot sun 
  •  For noise, talking, or music   
   •  In the sun     •  In humid conditions  
  •  For emotional str ess 
  •  In the early mor ning and late 
at night  
   •  For jar ring and movement   •  At night  
  •  For noise and light    •  In hot sun 
  •  When lying on the right side 
   Allium cepa 
  (see page 34)  
6c as re quired 
up to 10 doses  
  Arsen. iod. 
  (see page 126)  
6c as re quired 
up to 10 doses  
  Euphrasia 
  (see page 142)  
6c as re quired 
up to 10 doses  
  Ferrum phos. 
  (see page 82)  
6c ever y 2 hours 
up to 4 doses  
  Nux vomica 
  (see page 63)  
6c ever y 2 hours 
up to 4 doses  
  Nat. mur . 
  (see page 92)  
6c ever y 2 hours 
up to 4 doses  
  Gelsemium 
  (see page 144)  
6c ever y 2 hours 
up to 10 doses  
  Belladonna 
  (see page 39)  
30c ever y 2 hours up to 10 doses   Hay fever with  
burning catar rh 
 Hay fever with constant  
desire to sneeze 
 Hay fever in which mainly 
the eyes ar e affected  
 Cold that comes  
on slowly 
 Cold with ir ritability  
 Early stages of a cold 
with sneezing 
 Inﬂ uenza with weakness  
 Inﬂ uenza with high fever easily when the immune system is weak, making the body  
vulnerable. Variations in the efficiency of the immune system  
explain why only some of the people exposed to a cold 
actually catch it. The immune system may be impaired by 
poor diet, overindulgence, exposure to cold or windy 
weather , or being chilled or overheated. In addition, the body ’s defenses are weakened by overwork, exhaustion, 
anxiety , and stress. A weak system also increases the 
possibility of allergic reactions to atmospheric particles. 
Homeopathy addresses imbalances in the immune system 
rather than fighting infection. Allergies may require 
constitutional homeopathic treatment   (see page 176) .
 SPECIFIC AILMENT  PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS  DISORDER  PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS  SYMPTOMS BETTER  SYMPTOMS WORSE  REMEDY & DOSAGE 



theory  
& practice

In the 5th century BCE the Greek physician Hippocrates  
(?460–?377 BCE) clearly established the idea that disease 
was the result of natural forces rather than divine 
intervention, and that patients’ own powers of healing 
should be encouraged  (see page 19) . Contemporary medical 
theories were based upon the Law of Contraries, which 
advocated treating an illness by prescribing a substance 
that produced opposite or contrary symptoms. Diarrhea, 
for example, could be treated by a substance that caused 
constipation, such as aluminum hydroxide.
In contrast, Hippocrates developed the use of the 
Law of Similars, based on the principle that “like cures 
like”  (see page 18) . This theory proposed that substances 
capable of causing symptoms of illness in healthy people could also be used to treat 
similar symptoms during illness. For example, Veratrum album  (white hellebore), which 
was considered effective against cholera, caused violent purging that led to severe 
dehydration if administered in large doses—symptoms exactly like those of cholera 
itself. Between the 1st and 5th centuries CE the Romans made further developments in 
medicine. They introduced more herbs into the pharmacopeias, improved public 
hygiene, and observed the structure and function of the human body , although this was 
limited by social taboo, which prevented the dissection of bodies. Existing medical 
knowledge was codified and rationalized by Galen (?130–?200 CE), a Roman physician, 
anatomist, and physiologist. He adopted many ancient Greek principles, including the 
Aristotelian theory of the “four humors,” which claimed that the human body was made 
up of four humors—blood, choler (yellow bile), melancholy (black bile), and phlegm—  
that must be kept in balance to ensure vitality and health.
After the decline of the Roman empire, little progress was made for centuries 
in the field of European medicine. A combination of herbal folklore, religious 
influences, and Galenic theory provided the basis for understanding and treating HISTORY OF  
HOMEOPATHY
The theories and principles of homeopathy have their origins  
in medicinal traditions established thousands of years ago  
in ancient Greece and Rome.THEORY & PRACTICE
CLASSICAL ORIGINS OF HOMEOPATHY This Greek votive 
relief, dating to the early 4th century BCE, illustrates the 
medicinal traditions of ancient Greece, on which both 
homeopathy and conventional Western medicine are based.12•

HISTORY OF HOMEOPATHY
illness right through to the 17th century. Only when the Swiss physician and 
alchemist Paracelsus (1493–1541) began to develop his theories did the study of 
medicine start to evolve again. Paracelsus revived the ancient Greek theory of the 
Doctrine of Signatures, which was based on the premise that the external appearance 
of a plant—God’s “signature”—indicated the nature of its healing properties. For 
example, Chelidonium majus  (greater celandine) was used to treat conditions affecting 
the liver and gallbladder because the yellow juice of the plant resembled bile.
Paracelsus argued that disease was linked to external factors such as 
contaminated food and water rather than to mystical forces, and he 
challenged his contemporaries to recognize the body’s natural ability to 
heal itself, claiming that the practice of medicine should be based on 
detailed observation and “profound knowledge of nature and her 
works.” According to his theories, all plants and metals contained 
active ingredients that could be prescribed to match specific 
illnesses. Concentrating on practical experiments rather than 
on alchemy, he laid the foundations for the early stages of 
chemistry and subsequent development of pharmaceutical 
medicine, introducing new medicines, such as opium, 
sulfur, iron, and arsenic, into the contemporary 
repertory. His exploration of the chemical and 
medicinal properties of many substances, and his 
advocacy of the Hippocratic concept of “like cures 
like,” also made Paracelsus a key figure in the development 
of homeopathy. According to the British homeopath James 
Compton Burnett (1840–1901), the author of several 
important works on homeopathy that are still in use today, 
“Paracelsus planted the acorn from which the mighty oak of 
homeopathy has grown.”
Medical practices by the 19th century
The period between the 16th and 19th centuries saw continued advancement in medical 
knowledge. The development of the printing press, and the publication of herbals in 
languages other than Latin, brought herbal knowledge into homes on a wide scale and 
decreased the monopoly of doctors and apothecaries on the treatment of illness. Hugely 
influential English-language herbals, such as the Herball  of John Gerard (1545–1612), and 
The English Physitian  by Nicholas Culpeper (1616–54), were published during this period.
Despite medical advances and greater dispersal of herbal lore, however, the general 
health of the population remained poor in many Western countries. Industrialization was 
accompanied by population transition from rural areas to polluted, overcrowded cities PHILIPPUS AUREOLUS PARACELSUS One of the 
greatest scientists of the 16th century, Paracelsus 
was considered responsible for the transition from 
alchemy to modern chemistry. Known as the “father 
of chemistry,” he believed in exact dosage, and 
stated that “it depends only on the dose whether a 
poison is a poison or not.”•13

with working conditions that were often unsafe. Standards of public hygiene and medical 
care were often low , and the mentally ill were treated in asylums. Violent medical practices, 
including blood-letting, leeching, and purging, became increasingly widespread and were 
often detrimental to people’s health. Toxic substances such as lead, mercury , and arsenic 
were in common usage medicinally , and the cure often proved to be more harmful to 
patients than the illness, with some patients dying and many more suffering serious long-
term side-effects as a result of the drastic or extreme treatments they had received.
The origins of homeopathy
This was the cultural and scientific milieu in which the German doctor Samuel Christian 
Hahnemann (1755–1843) began practicing in 1780. He continued in practice for nine years, 
during which time he became increasingly disillusioned with the harsh medical methods of 
the day . In articles written to supplement his income, Hahnemann attacked the extreme 
medical practices of the day , advocating instead good public hygiene, improved housing 
conditions, better nutrition, fresh air, and exercise. Eventually his convictions led him to 
cease work as a doctor. He wrote later that it had been agony to work “always in darkness,” 
with no secure principles in place regarding health and disease.
At this time a period of great social and political change evolved in Europe. The 
Industrial Revolution and the Enlightenment were accompanied by great technological 
and scientific advances, and increasing freedom of thought and expression. This ALLEGORY OF DEATH Between the Middle Ages and the Enlightenment there was 
little faith in medical practice: in this 15th-century French book illumination, 
doctors examine a patient’s pulse and urine, while death waits in the wings.THEORY & PRACTICE 14•

intellectual climate encouraged important developments in the study of medicine, 
including the isolation of active ingredients from herbs, such as the extraction of 
morphine from the opium poppy in 1803. It was in 1790, while translating A T reatise on 
Materia Medica  by a Scottish teacher, physician, and chemist, Dr. William Cullen, that 
Hahnemann began an investigation which was to prove paramount to the subsequent 
development of homeopathy . In his treatise Cullen argued that quinine, when isolated 
from Cinchona officinalis  (see page 49) , was a good treatment for malaria because it was 
an astringent. Hahnemann knew that other, more powerful, astringents had no such 
effect on malaria. He dosed himself with quinine, recording the results and effectively 
beginning the first “proving”  (see page 22) . Although he did not have malaria, he found 
that he began to develop symptoms of the disease one after the other. With each dose  
of quinine, the symptoms recurred and lasted for several hours, but if he 
stopped taking quinine his symptoms began to disappear. Hahnemann 
went on to test quinine on other people, noting their reactions in 
great detail. The test subjects were not allowed to eat or drink 
strong foods such as spices, alcohol, or coffee, which he felt 
might distort the results. He repeated the proving process on 
other substances that were in use as medicines, such as 
arsenic and belladonna, and used the results to build up  
a “symptom picture” of each remedy’s effects  (see page 23) .
After conducting provings for six years, Hahnemann 
extended his research to the sick. Prior to prescription, he gave 
his patients a thorough physical examination and noted any 
existing symptoms. He questioned them closely regarding their 
lifestyles, general health, outlook on life, and other factors that 
made them feel better or worse. Following the principle of like 
cures like, Hahnemann then matched individual symptoms as 
closely as possible to the symptom picture of a remedy , and 
prescribed accordingly .
Development & definition
Hahnemann’s work gradually brought about the establishment of new type of medicine.  
In 1796 he published his first book on the subject, entitled A New Principle for 
Ascertaining the Curative Powers of Drugs and Some Examinations of Previous Principles . He 
called his new system “homeopathy ,” from the Greek homeo  meaning “similar” and 
pathos  meaning “suffering.” In 1810 he set out its principles in The Organon of Rationale 
Medicine , and two years later he began teaching homeopathy at the University of Leipzig. 
During the course of his lifetime, Hahnemann proved about 100 remedies, and also 
continued to develop and refine the theory and practice of the system  (see page 18) .SAMUEL CHRISTIAN HAHNEMANN Born in 
1755 in Meissen, Germany, Hahnemann 
studied at the universities of Leipzig, 
Erlangen, and Vienna before qualifying in 
medicine and chemistry in 1779. Abhorrence 
of the medical practices of the time led him 
to devise a new system of medicine, which 
he called homeopathy.HISTORY OF HOMEOPATHY •15

The medical establishment remained generally very sceptical of Hahnemann’s theories, 
and he in turn continued to be intensely critical of conventional medical practice. He 
became known as the “raging hurricane” due to his furious tirades and sarcastic 
critiques during lectures at Leipzig. He also antagonized contemporary pharmacists by 
giving only one medicine at a time, which was contrary to their (highly lucrative) 
practice of generally prescribing expensive mixtures of 
several remedies. During the 19th century , homeopathy 
spread rapidly across Europe to Asia and the Americas. 
In the US, Dr. Constantine Hering (1800–80) and Dr. 
James T yler Kent (1849–1916) were responsible for 
popularizing the therapy and introducing new ideas and 
practices  (see page 19) . By the time of Hahnemann’s 
death in 1843, homeopathy was firmly established in 
many parts of the world, although there remained 
antagonism and distrust between the advocates of 
conventional medicine and those of homeopathy. 
Between 1860 and 1890 homeopathy flourished, as 
many homeopathic hospitals and schools were opened, 
and many new remedies were proved, considerably 
enlarging the materia medica. Hahnemann’s followers 
were often doctors who defected from conventional 
medicine after personally experiencing treatment, 
including an English doctor, Frederick Quin (1799–
1878), who was cured of cholera by the Camphora  
remedy . Quin first visited Hahnemann in Germany in 
1826, and went on to introduce homeopathy in the UK, 
founding the first homeopathic hospital in London in 1849. During a cholera outbreak 
in 1854, the mortality rate at his hospital was less than half that of conventional 
hospitals. This information was suppressed by the national Board of Health on the 
grounds that “the figures would give sanction to a practice opposed to the maintenance 
of truth and the progress of science,” illustrating the close stranglehold the medical 
establishment had achieved within social institutions.
Decline & resurrection
The predominance of conventional medicine was echoed in the US. By the late 19th 
century , homeopathy had become a significant part of US medical practice, with about 
15 percent of doctors being practicing homeopaths. During the early 20th century , 
however, homeopathy became largely overshadowed by conventional medicine, 
principally due to the rise of the American Medical Association.DUBIOUS MEDICAL PRACTICES Hahnemann believed 
passionately that many contemporary medical practices 
were harmful, exploiting the infirm or gullible, and he was 
not alone in his criticism. Medicine was often the subject of 
satire for its “quackish” treatments, as shown in this 19th-
century cartoon illustrating the “Sweat Cure,” with the 
servant inquiring, “Is Your Lordship Still Not Sweating?”.THEORY & PRACTICE 16•

The British Medical Association played a similar role 
in the UK, and divisions within homeopathy began to 
weaken the force of its message still further. Strict 
followers of Hahnemann and Kent’s original theories 
followed “classical” or “Kentian” constitutional 
prescribing, believing that a person’s emotional 
characteristics and physical symptoms should be 
taken into account and favoring high potencies  (see 
page 19) . Led by the British homeopath Dr. Richard 
Hughes (1836–1902), one strand of practitioners had, 
however, begun to prescribe on pathological symptoms 
alone, favoring low doses. This unfortunate division in 
homeopathic practice enabled the conventional medical establishment to gain the upper 
hand, and by the 1920s homeopathy had been largely suppressed in the UK.
During the late 20th century there has been a resurgence in the popularity of 
homeopathy , possibly due to disenchantment with aspects of conventional medicine. In 
many countries, particularly in central Europe, its popularity never waned to the same extent 
as in the UK and US, although differences in practice have evolved. Single-remedy classical 
prescribing is prevalent worldwide, although in Germany and France complex homeopathy 
or polypharmacy (the use of combination remedies or several remedies) is also popular  (see 
page 21) . In Australia there is a strong link with naturopathy , with homeopathic remedies 
often incorporated into naturopathic practice. In India, homeopaths have long worked 
successfully alongside traditional Ayurvedic medicine and conventional medicine. In the 
1990s, courses in Eastern Europe pioneered by British teachers revitalized interest in 
homeopathy , and in Russia it continues to be implemented and developed. In South America, 
homeopathy is widely taught in medical schools, while in the US it is undergoing a major 
resurgence of popularity . According to a 1998 survey of Americans and their health, over  
6 million Americans had used homeopathy in the preceding 12 months. Noting that it had 
been integrated into the national healthcare systems of numerous countries, including 
Germany , the United Kingdom, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Mexico, the World Health 
Organization is publishing a 
position paper in 2006.
FABIOLA HOSPITAL Situated in 
northern California, the Fabiola 
homeopathic hospital was one  
of more than 100 homeopathic 
hospitals operating in the US at  
the turn of the 20th century.  
There were also 22 homeopathic 
medical schools and more than 
1,000 homeopathic pharmacies.LONDON HOMEOPATHIC HOSPITAL The astoundingly low mortality 
rate at this hospital during the 1854 cholera outbreak in London 
prompted a government inspector to note, “if it should please the 
Lord to visit me with cholera I would wish to fall into the hands of 
a homeopathic physician.”HISTORY OF HOMEOPATHY •17

KEY PRINCIPLES  
& THEORIES
The vitalistic concept of science had existed for many years by 
the time Hahnemann was developing his theories. It claims that 
all living things possess a subtle energy beyond their physical 
and chemical states, and that even inanimate matter may contain 
vitality . Hahnemann applied this view to both the human body 
and to seemingly inert substances from all the kingdoms of 
matter. Thus the vital force of any plant, mineral, or animal 
could be harnessed to produce a powerful medicine when 
“potentized”  (see right) . Hahnemann viewed ill-health as the 
result of an internal imbalance affecting the body’s vital force and disrupting its 
equilibrium. If this vital force is put under strain or weakened by this imbalance, illness 
may develop. In stimulating the body’s self-healing abilities to fight any 
imbalance, the vital force produces symptoms. These may manifest 
externally , producing such symptoms as fever or a skin rash, or may 
emerge as emotional or psychological states, such as weepiness or 
great irritability . An effective medicine must help the vital force to 
redress the internal imbalance, enabling the symptoms produced by 
that imbalance to disappear, and this is what homeopaths seek to 
achieve. Hahnemann adopted the principle of similia similibus curentur , 
or “like cures like”  (see box) , first established in the 5th century BCE by 
Hippocrates. His “provings” of remedies  (see page 22)  aimed to 
establish the particular set of symptoms, or “symptom picture”, 
produced by taking a substance. When the symptom picture 
matched the particular set of symptoms produced by an illness 
or imbalance in a patient, that remedy was indicated as  
the most effective at stimulating the vital force to treat the 
disorder. The key was – and in classical homeopathy still is – to 
establish which remedy most exactly matches a patient’s 
symptom picture.Homeopaths believe that good health derives from an equilibrium 
between the mind and body , which is maintained by a “vital force” that 
regulates the body’s self-healing capabilities.THEORY & PRACTICE
According to the concept of like cures  
like, also known as the Law of Similars, 
substances that are capable of provoking 
certain symptoms in an otherwise healthy 
body can also act curatively on similar 
symptoms in a sick person. For instance, 
belladonna would be used to treat scarlet 
fever, since the symptoms of belladonna 
poisoning closely resemble those of  
scarlet fever.LIKE CURES LIKE
HIPPOCRATES This Greek physician became known 
as the “father of medicine” for his work in moving 
healing away from mysticism and religion. He laid 
the foundations for the science of medicine as it  
is known today, and established key principles, 
among them the theory of “like cures like”  
(see box, opposite).18•

HISTORY OF HOMEOPATHY
Many of the substances from which remedies are made are highly 
potent or possibly even poisonous. Hahnemann used only small 
doses of substances in his medicines, but to his consternation his 
patients still tended to suffer side-effects, or “aggravations”, as he 
called them. He developed a technique called “potentization”  (see 
page 28) , which involved diluting and shaking the medicine 
vigorously or banging it on a hard surface during preparation. 
This turbulent motion, which Hahnemann called “succussion”, 
apparently released more potency into the medicine, even at 
lower dilutions. To Hahnemann’s surprise, his research showed 
that microdilutions prepared with the additional turbulent 
energy provided by potentization seemed to have a much 
stronger effect than standard dilutions, providing a rapid and 
gentle effect that was long lasting. Homeopaths therefore need to 
give only this minimum, completely safe dosage. Hahnemann’s 
original theories were expanded further by the US homeopaths, 
Dr. Constantine Hering and Dr. James T yler Kent  (see page 16) . 
Dr. Hering developed three basic Laws of Cure to explain how 
illness is cured in homeopathy  (see box) , while Dr. Kent 
established a clear framework by which a course of treatment 
could be understood. Possible scenarios included: the patient 
gets better; the patient gets worse; the patient’s condition remains 
unchanged; the patient initially gets worse but then gets better. 
Dr. Kent laid down 12 different possible outcome scenarios, 
including the above, which enabled homeopaths to determine 
how treatment should be continued and assess whether a 
particular remedy had been successful or not. Since the 1970s 
the Greek homeopath George Vithoulkas has done a great deal of 
research to update the scenarios and refine the theory and 
practice of homeopathy .
Constitution & susceptibility
In homeopathic terms, a person’s “constitution” describes their state of health, including 
their temperament and any inherited and acquired characteristics. Homeopaths believe 
that healthy people resist developing sickness, despite being constantly exposed to an 
enormous variety of potentially harmful viruses and bacteria, since their vital force is 
strong and their susceptibility is therefore low. Their degree of susceptibility to ill-health 
may change, however, from hour to hour and day to day . It depends on a particular LAWS OF CUREDR. CONSTANTINE HERING This 19th-century US 
homeopath formulated three “Laws of Cure” that 
provide a useful guide for interpreting a 
patient’s development.
As a patient progresses towards cure, 
symptoms move from the inner organs of 
the body (those most vital to life) to the 
outer, less vital tissues and organs.
Cure usually takes place from the top of the 
body to the bottom; so, for example, head 
symptoms clear ﬁrst, gradually followed by 
any symptoms on the extremities.
Old symptoms often resurface during  
the curative process, usually in the reverse 
order to that in which they had ﬁrst 
appeared. Immunologists claim that the 
body has the capacity to “remember”  
every “assault” on the system that it has 
ever reacted to, and this process conﬁrms 
that capacity.•19

stress or emotional distress, overworking, exposure to pollutants, or 
intake of drugs  (see page 177) . Underlying “miasmatic” factors may 
also affect the ability of the vital force to withstand any onslaught  
(see below) . Some homeopaths place great importance on the 
patient’s “constitutional type” when they are prescribing treatment, 
choosing remedies whose “symptom picture”  (see page 23)  exactly 
match the individual’s psychological and physical makeup when 
healthy . These remedies are taken when healthy to strengthen the 
patient’s vital force and build up resistance to developing symptoms 
that may occur in the future. Health problems generally fall into two 
categories: acute or short-term illness, arising rapidly and potentially 
clearing up quickly (such as a cold or minor digestive problem); and 
chronic, long-term ill health (such as rheumatoid arthritis or 
diabetes), which has a tendency to be recurrent, deep-seated, or 
progressively degenerative. Homeopathic remedies work to support 
the self-healing powers of the vital force in its response to illness: to 
speed recovery from acute illness and make the duration of the 
illness less debilitating; or to aid recovery from recurrent illness or prevent it from 
recurring altogether. Remedies must be carefully chosen, however, if they are to work at 
optimum efficiency , and chronic conditions are best treated by qualified homeopaths 
rather than left to self-diagnosis.
Miasms & predisposition
After many years developing his ideas, Hahnemann noticed that some patients still did 
not seem to respond to the remedies prescribed for them, or that they relapsed after a 
short time. He studied these cases all together as a group, and concluded that general, 
inherent, higher-level themes of ill health were to blame. These he called “miasms.”  
They can be described as the chronic effect of an underlying disease or disease 
susceptibility , present in an individual or in previous generations of that person’s family 
history . Three particular miasms were identified by Hahnemann— Psora  (which relates 
to scabies), Sycosis  (which is linked with gonorrhea), and Syphilis  
(which is based on syphilis). Cancer and tuberculosis are 
regarded by some as further potential miasms. He developed 
remedies called “nosodes,” made from the diseases themselves, 
to combat these miasms. Since all infected material is sterilized 
before the potentizing process of dilution and succussion, it is 
completely safe to use.
The concept of a miasm proposes a model of people’s 
health that has layers of predisposition or imbalance. In some DR. JAMES TYLER KENT This hugely influential 
US homeopath was responsible for establishing 
a clear framework on which to judge the 
efficacy of prescribed treatment (see page 19),  
and also carried out a great deal of research 
into new substances to enlarge the materia 
medica of homeopathic medicines.
Hahnemann developed nosode remedies 
to counteract the miasms he believed to 
be responsible for sometimes “blocking” 
treatment. They were made from infected 
tissue or bacteria, but were perfectly  
safe, since the substances were sterilized 
and potentized. Psorinum , for instance,  
 is made from scabies-infected tissue, 
while Carcinosin  is derived from  
cancerous tissue.NOSODESTHEORY & PRACTICE 20•

cases more layers need to be peeled away than others to reach lasting good health. At a 
certain stage in the treatment process, an underlying miasm may become clearly active. 
Treatment can then be tailored to overcome it. However, it should be emphasized that 
this does not mean that a person actually has the diseases that are implied by the names 
of the miasms. Rather, the names describe the inheritance of a predisposition to a 
specific pattern of possible symptoms or a tendency to fall ill in a particular way—the 
person’s susceptibility . For instance, Psora  relates to slow development and poor 
nutrition; whereas Sycosis  is associated with a frantic pace of life and overactivity of both 
mental and physical processes; and Syphilis  describes a pattern of breakdown, decay , 
deterioration, and eating away .
T ypes of homeopathic practice
Various prescribing habits have developed in different countries or at different 
times. A clear conceptual division has emerged between two main schools of 
practice, classical and complex. Classical homeopaths generally treat with a single 
remedy that exactly matches the patient’s inherent constitutional type and symptom 
picture. There are occasions, however, particularly in the case of acute illness or 
injury, where the physical symptoms far outweigh the emotional and other 
symptoms. In cases such as these a more pragmatic approach may be taken, using 
combinations of remedies in low potencies. Thus, for instance, five or six remedies 
known to be helpful for influenza might be combined in a single tablet. This is the 
complex approach, based on the theories of the British homeopath Dr. Richard 
Hughes  (see page 17) , and also known sometimes as combination homeopathy or 
polypharmacy. In some situations, generally of an acute nature, it may be adopted 
by classical homeopaths, but in certain countries it is actually the standard method 
of prescribing. In 1948 it was officially sanctioned by the American Institute of 
Homeopathy, and in many European countries, such as France and Germany, 
polypharmacy is more common than classical homeopathy.
Further variations on the homeopathic principle include isopathy , in which a 
potentized microdilution of the substance causing the disorder is actually used to treat 
the symptoms: for example, Apis (which is made from the sting of bee) might be given 
to someone to treat a bee sting. A classical homeopath will generally only expect a 20 to 
30 percent success rate using this method, since it does not take into account the unique 
constitution of each patient. A refinement of this concept is tautopathy , in which the 
exact  substance triggering the symptoms is used to make a remedy for treating those 
symptoms. In theory this means that the remedy for a bee sting would be prepared from 
the actual bee  that had inflicted the sting. In practice the concept is most commonly used 
for allergic reactions, such as treating a child with a remedy made from a vaccination to 
which the child has reacted.HISTORY OF HOMEOPATHY •21

22•
BUILDING A  
MATERIA MEDICA
The reasons why particular substances were selected as homeopathic remedies are complex and 
varied. Many were familiar from traditional Western folklore or herbal lore. Some, such as mercury , 
were used in contemporary conventional medicine. Others included minerals or elements that 
had been used as nutritional supplements, such as zinc. Out of curiosity , or because they had a 
long herbal tradition or were known to have a strong, even toxic, effect, different substances were 
tried and the information cataloged. The greatest influence came initially from herbalists in Europe 
but, as knowledge grew of the medicinal traditions of other cultures, more substances were tested 
for their homeopathic potential. European explorers and settlers filtered back information amassed 
on their travels. Dr. Constantine Hering  (see page 16) , for instance, visited South America and 
discovered the healing properties of the bushmaster snake  (see page 109) .
Hahnemann set down strict guidelines for testing, or “proving,” potential remedies. This 
term developed from Prüfung , the German word for a trial. A set of volunteers, or “provers,” 
take a trial substance in different strengths, or potencies  (see page 19) , and make a detailed, More than 4,000 substances from the plant, animal, and mineral kingdoms 
have been tested since Hahnemann ﬁrst developed his theories, resulting  
in a materia medica that contains over 2,000 remedies.THEORY & PRACTICE
THE WORLD OF THE APOTHECARY 
The eclectic assortment of  
plants and minerals mixed and 
dispensed in a standard 18th-
century apothecary are illustrated 
in this painting of the period by 
an anonymous artist. Many of 
these medicines were tested  
by Hahnemann and others for 
their curative potential as 
homeopathic remedies.

•23 HISTORY OF HOMEOPATHY
daily record of their moods, sensations, and any symptoms that develop. Symptoms are 
categorized as general, relating to a temperamental picture, or specific, affecting a particular 
part of the body . Surrounding or provoking circumstances, and triggers that make symptoms 
better or worse, are all noted. Certain general, physical, and psychological affinities appear 
more evident than others, and some symptoms will be very common among the provers; for 
example, a headache first thing in the morning that gets better after eating, or indifference to 
loved ones. These are “first-line” symptoms. Other symptoms may be experienced by only a 
few, or even one, prover. These are known respectively as “second-line” and “third-line” 
symptoms. Any symptom that can be shown to be unlike the person’s usual state of health 
will be recorded. This information is then compiled to produce a “symptom picture” that 
takes into account the potential variations produced by different 
provers’ constitutional types. Often this will then be compared with 
information about the substance and its characteristics, possibly 
from its prior use within herbal or folk medicine, or from knowledge 
of its toxicology , to deepen understanding of the remedy . As 
understanding of each remedy’s “symptom picture” grows, an 
archetypal “character” emerges. Essential or “keynote” characteristics, 
both mental and physical, can be established to give a thumbnail 
summary , enabling homeopaths to recognize cases where a particular 
remedy is appropriate. Dr. James T yler Kent  (see page 19)  carried out 
a great deal of research to enlarge knowledge of the remedies in the 
materia medica, and his work has been built on and augmented by 
many other practitioners.
Beyond the individual remedies, it is possible to make 
connections between remedies and to establish group relationships. 
Studying the group of remedies based on potassium or calcium 
compounds, for example, reveals themes, such as physical weakness 
with all Kalium  remedies, or sensitivity and shyness with all Calcium  
remedies. This thematic analysis is most obvious in clear categories 
like families of the periodic table, which have recently been researched by the British 
homeopath Jeremy Sherr. Relationships between plants within the same botanical family , or 
between animals with common links, can also be found. For example, all snake-based 
remedies tend to affect the blood and nervous system, and are for highly oversensitive 
individuals. The Indian homeopath Rajan Sankaran is working on an approach to case-taking 
that emphasizes the underlying sensations a patient feels, and linking this to a framework 
running through the animal, plant, and mineral kingdoms and families that form the basis of 
remedies. The breadth of information available from some of the old provings is not complete, 
whereas other provings are very well documented. New provings tend to be carefully managed 
and usually give a full picture.ENLARGING THE MATERIA MEDICA Explorers to 
new worlds, such as the Victorian naturalist 
depicted in this engraving, published in 1868, 
collected samples and information on a wide 
range of plants and animals, some of which 
were then added to the materia medica of 
homeopathic remedies.

DEVELOPMENT OF 
HOMEOPATHY
While funding existed for major drug research due to investment by drug companies, such 
funding has been harder to find for homeopathic trials. Nor do homeopathic trials have the 
same kind of access to the research facilities of universities, hospitals, and researchers. Trials 
into homeopathy are further disadvantaged by the fact that so much depends on the skill 
and judgment of the practitioner in assessing the appropriate remedy for the patient. One of 
the most important issues to be addressed in trials is the influence of the placebo effect  (see 
box). Clinical trials conducted by Dr. D. Taylor-Reilly in 1986 in Glasgow , Scotland, 
demonstrated a clear, statistically significant improvement in patients treated homeopathically 
that could not be attributed purely to a placebo response. He concluded that either 
homeopathy does work or clinical trials do not. There have also been meta-analyses, in 
which a large group of similar trials are analyzed as if they were one huge study , often 
yielding more significant results than small-scale trials might do individually . Three of the 
most important meta-analyses to date are that led by Prof. J. Kleijnen, 
published in the British Medical Journal  in 1991; that led by Dr. J. P . 
Boissel, which was carried out for the European Commission and 
published in Brussels in 1996; and that by Dr. K. Linde and others, 
published in The Lancet  in 1997. All three meta-analyses were done 
by skeptical, independent researchers, none of whom were practicing 
homeopaths, and all three concluded that, despite their best efforts 
to show otherwise, homeopathy has an action above and beyond 
that of merely a placebo. Valuable trials of homeopathy in veterinary 
medicine, undertaken by the British homeopathic veterinarian Mr. 
C. Day in 1984, suggest that homeopathy’s action cannot be 
attributed purely to a placebo effect if it works on animals, since 
animals are not susceptible to such influences. Various individual 
trials have demonstrated a degree of success for homeopathic 
treatment of specific ailments, such as a 1980 study by Dr. R. G. 
Gibson in Glasgow of homeopathic treatment for rheumatoid Hahnemann’s ﬁrst experiments on himself arguably constituted some 
of the earliest medical trials. Medical research has become far more 
sophisticated since then, yet strict clinical trials into the efﬁ cacy of 
homeopathy were rare until as late as the 1980s.THEORY & PRACTICE
In clinical drug trials, some of the test 
subjects are given a genuine, active 
medication, while others are given a 
placebo—an inactive medication, often  
a sugar pill, which is given in place of 
genuine treatment. Test subjects do not 
know whether they are receiving the active 
drug or the placebo. Research into the 
immune system has revealed that the 
expectations of patients can actually 
inﬂuence their healing processes. Thus, 
since they expect their medication to work, 
the placebo may have a therapeutic effect. 
Clinical trials test active drugs against  
a control group receiving a placebo to 
ensure that any positive effects take into 
account this placebo response. The 
experimental group must perform 
signiﬁcantly better than those taking  
the placebo for the test drug to be 
deemed effective.PLACEBO RESPONSE24•

DEVELOPMENT OF HOMEOPATHY
arthritis, and a 1994 trial of homeopathy for diarrhea in Nicaragua by a US pediatrician, Dr. 
J. Jacobs. There have also been positive trials on the efficacy of homeopathy on toothaches 
and teething, including a 1985 French study in Lyon by Dr. P . Berthier, and a German study , 
published in 1994 by Dr. A. Vestweber in Erfahrungsheilkunde.
On the theoretical side, there is ongoing research into finding a scientific 
explanation for how a homeopathic remedy can be effective when it has been diluted so 
much that not a single molecule of the remedy’s base ingredient is left in the water. 
However, research suggests that water “remembers” a substance, or leaves a “molecular 
fingerprint.” More work is now being conducted to determine the properties of 
homeopathic remedies on an energetic or “quantum” level.
An effective alternative
Alongside clinical trials there have been a number of outcome studies that, while not being 
double-blind and controlled, ask patients about the outcome of their treatment. Outcome 
studies at the Glasgow Homoeopathic Hospital in Scotland, on patients who had already had 
unsuccessful conventional treatment for a range of illnesses, including depression, multiple 
sclerosis, and cancer, reported a significant decrease in their use of conventional medicine. 
While these studies are not directly clinically controlled, they have great implications, not 
just for patients’ health but also for the financing of medical services. Possible consequences 
include the use of cheaper medication, a decrease in hospital admissions, and the reduced 
costs of treating the side-effects of conventional medication. A 1998 report by the Faculty of 
Homoeopathy in the UK argues that clinical trials consistently demonstrate the benefits of 
homeopathy in terms of patient care and cost-effectiveness.
In many Western countries there is a public trend away from some aspects of 
conventional, drug-based medicine, and sympathy with the idea of a more “holistic” way 
of treating the “whole person.” There is growing interest from the medical establishment 
in exploring the possibility of integrating some complementary therapies, including 
homeopathy , into their treatment approaches. This is in part due to rising healthcare 
costs, the alarming side-effects of some medical treatments, and the lack of success in 
conventionally treating some conditions, such as cancer. If integration is to become a 
reality , however, high standards of education, practice, and research within homeopathy 
are needed. Ultimately , the aim is to ensure that homeopathy is being delivered to the 
public by suitably qualified and regulated practitioners operating according to a strong 
code of ethics to protect the patient. While there are still clearly key questions as to how 
homeopathy works, research and experience suggest that it is, as Hahnemann first 
proposed, safe, gentle, and effective. The active ingredients are given in highly diluted 
form and homeopathic remedies are virtually 100 percent safe and can be given to 
babies, pregnant women, and the elderly . Homeopathy integrates well with conventional 
medicine and can be used in a truly complementary fashion.•25



materia
medica

28•28•
HOW REMEDIES ARE MADE
Remedies are made by the process of dilution and succussion. 
Strictly speaking, remedies are not in themselves homeopathic; 
they become homeopathic only when they are prescribed 
according to the principle of “like cures like” ( see page 18 ). 
When the remedy is given accurately and effectively “mirrors” the patient’s symptoms ( see page 177 ), it can then be 
considered to be acting homeopathically . The experience, 
judgment, and skill of the practitioner are responsible for 
selecting the appropriate remedy . Remedies are prepared  
to exact guidelines, but may vary in strength.MATERIA MEDICA
Hahnemann laid down precise guidelines  
for the preparation of a homeopathic remedy 
(see opposite ). Measurements and methods 
were all strictly and scientifically controlled. 
He also developed a unique process called 
“potentization,” which allowed the full 
strength, or potency , of the substance to be 
released into the remedy mixture ( see page 19 ). 
The theory of dilution
Many remedies are based on highly active  
or even poisonous substances. Hahnemann 
established that remedies needed to be diluted 
to a very great degree to avoid side-effects. To 
his surprise he discovered that, paradoxically , 
the more diluted the remedy , the longer its 
action, the deeper its effect, and the fewer 
doses needed. Because the remedies are 
diluted to such a great degree, it is highly unlikely that even a single molecule of the 
original substance remains. This means that, 
although remedies may be based on highly 
poisonous substances, they are completely 
safe to use, even on children. However, this  
is also the main reason why homeopathy is 
still viewed with such skepticism by many 
orthodox doctors and scientists ( see page 24 ).
The potency prescribed is gauged by the 
homeopath according to the condition to be 
treated, the strength of the patient, and the 
circumstances. Not only must the remedy 
given be suitable, but the potency chosen 
must also be appropriate for the individual. 
Scales of dilution
Homeopathic remedies are generally prepared 
according to one of two scales: the decimal 
(x) and the centesimal ( c). 
PREPARING A POTENCY  The mother tincture  
(see opposite ) is usually diluted in a mixture  
of pure alcohol and distilled water according  
to one of several scales ( see above, right ). The 
ratio of alcohol to water varies depending on  
the base substance of the mother tincture. To 
produce a 1c potency, one drop of the mother tincture is added to 99 drops of an alcohol-  
and-water mixture and succussed. To produce  
a 2c potency, one drop of the 1c mixture is 
added to 99 drops of an alcohol-and-water 
mixture and succussed. To manufacture the  
6c potency illustrated below, this process is 
repeated a further four times.DILUTING & SUCCUSSINGIn the decimal scale, the dilution factor  
is 1:10, and in the centesimal scale it is 
1:100. Remedies usually have a number,  
such as 6c or 12x, after the name. This 
number indicates how many times it has  
been diluted and succussed, and on which 
scale; for example, the remedy Allium cepa 6c  
has been diluted and succussed six times on 
the centesimal scale.
More rarely , however, scales such as 
millesimal ( m) and quinquagintamillesimal 
(lm) are prepared. According to these scales, 
remedies are diluted by factors of 1:1,000  
and 1:50,000 respectively . The former is used 
mainly when a single, high-potency dose of  
a remedy is considered appropriate by the 
practitioner, while the latter is given when 
regular gentle dosing is needed in stubborn, 
chronic cases.Remedy potencies
REMEDY STRENGTHS
According to Hahnemann’s theories, the 
more diluted a remedy, the stronger it is 
and the higher the number, or “potency.” 
A less diluted remedy is not as strong and 
has a lower number, or potency. 
Drop of tincture 
is added to 
solution
SuccussionsDilution factor 1st
dilution
1c2nd
dilution
2c3rd
dilution
3c4th
dilution
4c5th
dilution
5c6th
dilution
6cLactose 
tabletsDrop of 
succussed 
remedy is 
added to 
tablets99 drops of alcohol/water solution
99 drops of alcohol/water solution
99 drops of alcohol/water solution
99 drops of alcohol/water solution
99 drops of alcohol/water solution
99 drops of alcohol/water solutionREMEDY GETS STRONGER AND MORE DILUTED
REMEDY GETS WEAKER AND LESS DILUTED3c
6c
12c
30c

•29 HOW REMEDIES ARE MADE
Homeopathic remedies are made from substances derived from plant, mineral, and animal sources. 
Depending on their natural state, they may be prepared in a variety of different ways. Plant and 
animal material may be used whole or chopped, depending on its size and density . Metals that are 
insoluble in their natural states are combined with lactose sugar crystals and ground repeatedly to 
form a powder fine enough to be soluble in water: this process is called trituration. Crystalline 
substances, seeds, and beans may also be ground up if they are hard, large, or insoluble in water.Preparation of homeopathic remedies
1 Plant material such as leaves, roots, and 
flowerheads ( above ), and some animal 
material, such as starfish, is chopped finely , 
while other substances are dissolved in water 
or ground to prepare them for use.
2 The substance is put in a large glass jar, 
into which is poured a solution of alcohol 
and distilled water (often 90 percent alcohol 
to 10 percent water, but this ratio varies 
depending on the substance).
3 The mixture is left to stand for a  
varying amount of time; mixtures that are 
macerated for longer periods may be shaken 
at intervals. Plant material may be steeped for 
several days or weeks, while mineral-based 
mixtures may be processed on to the next 
stage almost immediately . 4 After being macerated for the required 
period of time, the mixture is poured through 
a filter to strain it or expressed through a 
press to extract the liquid. This resulting 
liquid becomes the “mother tincture” for the 
remedy , and is stored in a dark glass jar. 
5 One drop of the mother tincture is 
diluted in a mixture of pure alcohol and 
distilled water according to one of several 
scales ( see opposite ), although the two most 
commonly used scales are the decimal and 
the centesimal. 
6 This mixture is shaken vigorously  
(see right ) or banged down firmly on a hard 
surface, a process devised by Hahnemann.  
He called it “succussion” and believed that  
the action enabled the liquid to be 
“potentized” ( see page 19 ). 
7 After the mixture has been succussed, 
steps 5 and 6 are repeated over and  
over again, as many times as necessary .  
Each time, the resulting mixture is diluted 
afresh in a mixture of pure alcohol and 
distilled water until, finally , the required  
level of dilution, and therefore the required 
potency for the homeopathic remedy , is 
obtained ( see left ). 
8 Once the mixture has reached 
the required strength and potency , 
a few drops of it are added to 
lactose tablets, pilules, granules, 
or powder ( see page 216 ), to 
impregnate them with the 
remedy . These are then stored  
in dark glass bottles. CAUTION
This information is not intended as a  
guide to making remedies. Homeopathic 
remedies should always be obtained from  
a reputable supplier.



major plant 
remedies
plants have been used for medicinal 
purposes for thousands of years, and the 
plant kingdom also provides the source 
for the majority of homeopathic remedies. 
in this section, some of the most 
important plant-based remedies are 
looked at in detail.

32•
Aconitum napellus
ACONITE
REMEDY PROFILE
Homeopaths consider using Aconite  for people 
who are excitable, generally healthy , and 
strong but develop illness rapidly and exhibit 
a marked sinking of strength. Physical and 
mental symptoms are like a great storm, 
arising suddenly but also subsiding quickly . 
Patterns of behavior are characterized by 
intense fear, anxiety , and restlessness, with 
susceptibility to extreme phobias, panic 
attacks, and a fear of death.
Physical symptoms often develop as  
a result of shock, fear, or exposure to cold, 
dry winds or, occasionally, intensely hot 
weather. Acute infections, such as colds  
and coughs, can be treated with the remedy, 
particularly at their onset. Aconite  may also 
be prescribed for anxiety states, and for 
mothers and infants during or immediately 
after childbirth.
Acute respiratory infections
SYMPTOMS  Cold or influenza symptoms that set 
in fiercely and rapidly , especially after exposure 
to cold, dry winds. There may be catarrh or 
phlegm and a sore throat, possibly a fever that 
makes the skin hot and dry . Croup and other 
acute chest infections may give rise to 
breathlessness, burning heat in the chest, and a 
hoarse, dry , barking cough. Sleep is frequently 
restless and agitated; at such times, the face may 
be hot, flushed, and swollen, although upon 
rising it may become very pale. Severe 
headaches may develop, accompanied by raging 
thirst, often for cold drinks. The mouth may 
taste bitter, so that everything except water tastes 
bad. The skin is hypersensitive, causing a 
marked aversion to being touched.
Symptoms better For warmth; for lying down; 
for fresh air.
Symptoms worse For heat; for stuffy rooms;  for lying on the affected area;  
for walking; at night; for music.
Eye & ear infections
SYMPTOMS Inflamed eyes 
with aching, burning pain, 
typically due to injury or 
conjunctivitis. The eyes may 
be oversensitive to light. Ear 
infections develop rapidly , 
causing intense pain, 
bright red ears, and 
hypersensitivity to noise. 
Symptoms may be accompanied by  
a high fever and restless, fearful agitation.
Symptoms better For quiet.
Symptoms worse For light; for noise.
Fear, shock & anxiety
SYMPTOMS Acute fear and anxiety 
accompanied by great restlessness and 
shocked, staring eyes with dilated pupils. 
Symptoms may be due to shock after 
witnessing a violent or frightening event,  
or may be triggered by phobias, such as  
a fear of flying, of heights, or of enclosed 
spaces. The fear or anxiety may trigger 
recurrent panic attacks, with palpitations, 
numbness, and tingling in the body. They 
may accompanied by a fear of death and  
a fear of people, with a strong desire to 
avoid company.
Symptoms better For open air; for rest.
Symptoms worse For stuffy rooms; for crowds; 
at night.
Problems in labor
SYMPTOMS Strong fear of impending death 
experienced by a mother during labor. There 
may be urine retention in either the mother  
or baby , or in both the mother and baby , 
immediately after the birth of the child, KEY SYMPTOMS complaints triggered by shock or exposure to cold winds  
• panic attacks and fear of death • acute infections of sudden onsetMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
ORIGIN
Grows in damp, shady, mountainous regions 
of Europe and Central Asia. Also cultivated 
as a garden plant.
BACKGROUND
Used externally, except on broken skin, to 
ease bruising and joint pain, but rarely used 
internally due to its toxic nature.
PREPARATION
Whole plant, including the root, is unearthed 
during the ﬂowering season, chopped, and 
macerated in alcohol.
COMMON NAMES
Aconite, monk’s-hood, wolf’s-bane, blue 
rocket, friar’s-cap.
See also Emotional problems, page 210 ; Headaches, page 218 ; Respiration, pages 226, 228 ; Children’s health, page 246especially if the mother experienced fear 
during labor.
Symptoms better For open air; for rest.
Symptoms worse For feeling overheated;  
for feeling chilled; for violent emotions.ACONITE This plant is known 
for its poisonous alkaloids, 
which are found at their 
highest concentrations  
in the root.
FLOWERING STEMHooded, blue-violet 
flowers appear in 
midsummerHistorically , the deadly juices derived from this plant were used as an arrow 
poison, hence the name aconite, from the Greek acon, or “dart.” Until the 
homeopathic remedy was proved by Hahnemann in 1805, aconite was used only 
externally in medicine. Aconite  became a popular alternative to the contemporary 
practice of blood-letting for the treatment of acute fevers and inflammations.
ROOT
SOURCE DETAILSRoot can cause 
poisoning when 
handled

•33
AGARICUSAgaricus muscarius syn. Amanita muscaria
REMEDY PROFILE
Those in need of Agaricus  may be anxious, 
insecure, or fearful, and have morbid thoughts 
about death. Anxiety about health may lead  
to an obsessive fear of having conditions such 
as cancer. Symptoms typically include great 
lethargy and an aversion to conversation, or 
delirium and loquacity to the point of ecstasy , 
elation, or hypomania, and disturbed sense  
of perspective.
People for whom Agaricus  is most suitable 
are particularly sensitive to the cold when  
ill. Some symptoms are worse prior to 
thunderstorms and after sexual intercourse.
Agaricus  is taken as a remedy for disorders  
of the nervous system that cause trembling, 
itching, and twitching and jerking of the limbs. 
Such conditions include epilepsy , chorea, and 
multiple sclerosis. Agaricus  can be prescribed for 
the treatment of the delirium tremens associated 
with alcoholism, and for the effects of senile 
dementia. It is also used to treat chilblains.
Nervous-system disorders
SYMPTOMS  T witching and spasms in almost  
any muscle group in the body , caused by 
degenerative neurological disorders such  
as senile dementia or multiple sclerosis. 
Symptoms tend to manifest themselves 
diagonally from one side of the body to the 
other, and may be accompanied by pain that 
is out of proportion to the clinical condition. 
There may also be sharp, shooting pains, with 
possible convulsions and spasms. Movements 
may be very shaky , with clumsiness, awkwardness, and a staggering gait. Further 
symptoms may include facial tics or Bell’s 
palsy , fainting, chorea, neuralgia, and sciatica.
Symptoms better  For slow movement;  
for sleep; at evening.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; before 
thunderstorms; after sexual intercourse;  
for touch.
Chorea
SYMPTOMS T witching, erratic, unpredictable 
limb movements and a sensation that the 
limbs are detached from the body .
Symptoms better For slow movement;  
for sleep; at evening.
Symptoms worse For cold air; before 
thunderstorms; after sexual intercourse.
Parkinson’s disease
SYMPTOMS General weakness with trembling 
and twitching limbs that exhibit the typical 
nervous symptoms  (see left) . The spine may  
be particularly sensitive to touch. Further 
symptoms may include a mental decline into 
great anxiety , despair, fear, and hypochondria.
Symptoms better  For slow movement;  
for sleep.
Symptoms worse  Before thunderstorms; after 
sexual intercourse.
Chilblains
SYMPTOMS  Chilblains with burning and itching. 
The skin shows signs of redness and swelling.
Symptoms better  For heat.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for  
cold compresses.KEY SYMPTOMS twitching and spasms • chilblains • depression or overexcitement  
• fear of cancer • complaints that are worse after sexual intercourse
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Grows in dry pastures and woods during 
summer in Scotland, Scandinavia, and  
other parts of Europe, as well as in Asia  
and the US.
BACKGROUND
Has been used throughout history as a 
hallucinogen, as a method of contacting the 
spirit world, and as a means of increasing 
human strength and endurance.
PREPARATION
The whole, fresh fungus or the dried cap is 
washed thoroughly and ground into a mash. 
It is then steeped in alcohol before being 
strained, diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Fly agaric, bug agaric.
See also Multiple sclerosis,  page 179 ; Palpitations,  page 186 ; Twitching eyelids,  page 220 ; Chilblains,  page 230MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
FLY AGARIC This 
fungus was once 
crumbled into milk 
to make fly poison. 
It has also been 
used as the toxic 
component in 
flypaper.Bright-red cap 
with white 
flecking fades to 
orange when 
fungus is dried
Alcoholism
SYMPTOMS  Delirium tremens with marked 
giddiness and an impulse to fall backward. 
The face is puffy and red, but not hot. There 
may be a marked increase in appetite.
Symptoms better  For slow movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; before 
thunderstorms; after sexual intercourse;  
after eating.This toxic toadstool’s common name, fly agaric, is derived from its traditional  
use as a fly poison. Fly agaric contains hallucinogens that were used by Siberian 
shamans to induce visionary states, and it may have formed the basis of the 
ancient Hindu soma  drink and the Zoroastrian haoma  drink, due to its ability  
to increase strength and stamina. The fungus has sedative properties in small 
doses but is highly toxic: a severe overdose can be fatal, while a mild overdose can 
cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, breathing problems, and confusion, although 
recovery usually takes place within 24 hours. The homeopathic remedy was 
proved in 1828 by Dr. Stapf, and it remains the only medicinal use of fly agaric.

Allium cepa
ALLIUM CEPA
REMEDY PROFILE
Melancholy , anxiety , fear of pain, and dullness 
of mind are not uncommon in individuals 
who respond well to Allium cepa , but there  
are no marked emotional symptoms indicative 
of the remedy .
Allium cepa  is used primarily for the 
treatment of coughs and colds characterized 
by profuse, watery catarrh that leaves the skin 
irritated and sore. Symptoms usually develop 
following exposure to cold weather and damp 
winds. They may be associated with hay fever, 
especially if accompanied by sensitivity to the 
scent of flowers. Allium cepa is also used to 
treat burning neuralgic pain that alternates 
from one side of the body to the other.
Catarrh
SYMPTOMS  Profuse, watery catarrh that  
burns the skin of the nose and upper lip, 
causing it to become raw , red, and painful. The 
nose may literally “drip like a faucet.” Constant, 
violent sneezing is common, as is congestion 
that alternates between nostrils or affects only 
one nostril. Allium cepa  is used for these 
symptoms in influenza, colds, and hay fever, but 
further remedies are needed to treat any actual 
susceptibility to hay fever itself.
Symptoms better  For being in the open air.
Symptoms worse  For warm rooms; in  
the evening.
Eye irritation
SYMPTOMS  An irritating discharge that causes 
an urge to rub the eyes. The eyes are red, 
swollen, and itchy , and possibly extremely 
sensitive to light.Symptoms better  For being in the open air.
Symptoms worse  For warm rooms; in the 
evening; for rubbing the eyes; for coughing.
Throat & chest infections
SYMPTOMS  Laryngitis with hoarseness and  
a raw, sore throat, or a cough characterized  
by a splitting, tearing sensation in the throat. 
There may be an urge to repress the cough,  
as it constantly irritates the throat. Pain may 
extend to the ear. Symptoms may develop 
rapidly on exposure to cold air, or after a cold 
accompanied by labored, wheezy breathing.
Symptoms better  For being in the open air.
Symptoms worse  For warm rooms; in  
the evening.
Neuralgic pains
SYMPTOMS  Sharp, burning pain on alternating 
sides of the body , mainly in the face, head, 
neck, and chest. It may be due to an earache, 
headaches behind the brow, or a toothache in 
the molars. Allium cepa  is also used for 
phantom limb pains after amputation.
Symptoms better  For being in the open air.
Symptoms worse  For being in a warm room.KEY SYMPTOMS burning catarrh • bland discharge from the eyes • splitting sensation  
in the throat • phantom pains • person feels worse in warm roomsMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
See also Allergies,  page 206 ; Hay fever & allergic rhinitis,  page 224CROSS-
SECTION
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to the Northern Hemisphere, and 
cultivated for centuries in the Middle East. 
Now grown worldwide as a vegetable.
BACKGROUND
Widely used in traditional medicine: as  
a poultice for chilblains, infections, and 
arthritis; internally for gastric and bronchial 
infections; and to thin and purify the blood.
PREPARATION
The whole, mature bulb is gathered  
in summer and chopped ﬁnely. It is  
steeped in alcohol for ten days and shaken 
repeatedly, before being ﬁltered, diluted,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Onion.ONION The antibiotic, anti-inflammatory, and 
expectorant properties of this plant are used 
worldwide to treat colds, coughs, and influenza.ONION 
BULB
In ancient Greece, the onion was esteemed and eaten in vast quantities. One of the 
oldest cultivated plants, its decongestant, diuretic, and other medicinal properties 
have been utilized by many cultures over the centuries. In the Middle Ages its 
strong smell was thought to prevent infection, and it was hung outside houses  
to ward off the plague. Onion causes the eyes and nose to water, and is used 
homeopathically to treat conditions that cause the same reaction in the body ,  
such as colds and influenza. The remedy Allium cepa  was proved in 1847  
by Dr. Constantine Hering.
Layers  of papery skin 
enclose volatile oil that 
stimulates tears34•

•35
ALOEAloe ferox ‘Miller’
REMEDY PROFILE
Homeopaths consider Aloe when the 
psychological traits exhibited include 
weariness, a reluctance to work, and  
great irritability, especially in cloudy 
weather. Dissatisfaction and anger are 
commonly directed internally, possibly 
producing constipation. Moreover, the 
person may dream about stools or 
involuntary soiling. Beer is a typical craving, 
despite the fact that it usually exacerbates 
any physical symptoms.
Aloe is most frequently prescribed for 
disorders of the large intestine. It may be 
taken for congestion in the pelvic organs 
and the head, and is also thought to counter 
fatigue, hemorrhoids, and the possible 
consequences of a sedentary lifestyle, 
particularly in the elderly.
Diarrhea
SYMPTOMS  A sudden urge to pass stools, 
which is at its strongest particularly early in 
the morning, possibly forcing an early rise 
from bed at around 5 a.m. Accompanied by 
hot, explosive gas, the stools may contain 
mucus or jellylike lumps. They may be 
passed involuntarily, giving rise to a feeling 
of insecurity in the rectum (this may also be 
an indication of colitis). Diarrhea may 
alternate with constipation. It is marked by 
incomplete, unsatisfactory stools and heavy 
pressure in the lower abdominal area. 
Symptoms generally tend to be worse prior 
to menstruation, or may primarily affect the 
elderly or those with sedentary habits.
Symptoms better  For passing gas; for cool.Symptoms worse  First thing in the 
morning; for walking; immediately 
after eating; for oysters; for beer.
Hemorrhoids
SYMPTOMS  Hemorrhoids that resemble small 
bunches of grapes and protrude from the 
anus. They are typically accompanied by 
soreness and tenderness. There may be a 
painful, burning sensation in the rectum and 
anus, and flatulent diarrhea.
Symptoms better  For bathing in cold water.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for jarring 
movement; upon sitting down; after eating  
or drinking.
Hepatitis
SYMPTOMS  A sensation of congestion and heat in 
the liver. There may be rumbling and distention 
in the abdomen, causing it to feel full, heavy , 
bloated, and hot. An accumulation of gas may 
accompany this feeling of distention, as well as 
strain and tension that is felt in the area between 
the pubic bone and the coccyx.
Symptoms better  For cold; for open air.
Symptoms worse  For heat; after eating  
or drinking.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Severe, painful headaches that seem 
to trigger a sensation of congestion in the face 
and in the head. These headaches frequently 
appear to alternate with the occurrence of 
hemorrhoids or diarrhea, or may be associated 
with pain in the lower back.
Symptoms better  For open air; for cold 
compresses on the head.
Symptoms worse For heat.KEY SYMPTOMS involuntary stools • diarrhea with sudden urging, especially at  
5 a.m. • insecure feeling in the rectum • headaches that are better for cold compresses
See also Diarrhea,  page 238MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
ALOE The gel of this plant has  
a long history of medicinal use  
as a skin lotion.
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to southern Africa, particularly the 
northern, eastern, and western Capes, but 
now cultivated throughout the world. Found 
in fertile, well-drained areas with sandy soil 
and direct sunlight.
BACKGROUND
Traditionally, aloe gel has been used as a 
laxative and purgative. Various research trials 
conducted between 1979 and 1995 found 
that extracts from the plant boost immune-
system functioning, and may even help to 
treat cancer and irritable bowel syndrome.
PREPARATION
The juice is extracted from the plant and 
dried to make a hard resin, which is then 
powdered and steeped in alcohol. The 
mixture is left to macerate for at least ﬁve 
days, after which it is ﬁltered, and then 
repeatedly diluted and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Aloe, Cape aloe.Spiny leaves form in 
rosette shapeLance-shaped  leaves contain 
a thick, clear gel
The medicinal properties of the various species of aloe have  
been exploited for centuries. The ancient Greeks and Romans 
considered aloe to be a valuable tonic and purgative. The purgative 
quality of dried aloe gel is still valued today in herbal medicine,  
but the plant is probably more familiar now as the source of a 
soothing and effective skin lotion. The Aloe remedy was proved by  
Buchner in 1821 and by the homeopath Dr. Helbig in 1833, and is  
used today mainly for digestive complaints, particularly diarrhea.

Anacardium orientale syn. Semecarpus anacardium
ANACARDIUM OR.
REMEDY PROFILE
Anacardium or .  is traditionally used for 
memory disturbance and a disturbed 
psychological state. It is considered especially 
apt for those who feel they are experiencing  
a conflict of will or are trapped between 
extremes of good and evil, sometimes 
described as “a demon sitting on one 
shoulder, an angel on the other.” These 
individuals are typically prone to low self-
esteem, or may exhibit hard, angry , cruel 
behavior. They may suspect that they are 
being pursued, or experience dreamlike  
states. T ypical physical symptoms include  
a feeling of constricted pain, as if bands are 
wrapped tightly around the body , or as if the 
gut or anus is plugged. In this connection, the 
remedy is used for certain conditions of the 
digestive tract. It is also used for skin 
irritations marked by severe itching and 
burning, and for minor chest pain.
Psychological problems
SYMPTOMS  A state of inner conflict expressed 
in contrary and changeable behavior. This 
conflict may provoke behavior that is cold-
hearted, violent, and cruel, with a compulsive 
urge to curse. Exaggerated affection toward  
a person or pet may be followed by cruelty  
or violence. An inferiority complex may be 
evident  (see above, right) . There may be an 
extremely poor memory , a lack of 
concentration, and general absent-
mindedness, especially at times of stress—  
for example, when studying for exams. In 
extreme cases, symptoms may be linked  
to a mental illness, such as depression, manic 
depression, or schizophrenia.Symptoms better For lying in the sun; for 
hot baths; in the late morning; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For mental exertion; for 
anger; for fright; for stress; for studying.
Low self-esteem
SYMPTOMS  Great feelings of unworthiness, 
irresolution, and low self-confidence, possibly 
with an inferiority complex, due to an inner 
conflict of will. Depending on the severity of 
the mental state, there may even be infrequent 
or ongoing self-abuse. Behavior patterns may 
be associated with prior subjection to abuse, 
violence, humiliation, or oppression.
Symptoms better  For lying in the sun; for hot 
baths; in the late morning; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For mental exertion; for fright; 
for stress; for humiliation.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Hemorrhoids, indigestion, and 
constipation with a painful constricted feeling, 
as if the gut or anus were plugged and the 
body wrapped by tight bands. The pain  
may stop after eating but resumes a few  
hours later.
Symptoms better  Immediately after eating.
Symptoms worse  For a hot bath or compress; 
at midnight; a few hours after eating.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Eczema and possibly patches of 
blistered skin, often on the forearms, causing 
intense itching and burning. The skin is highly 
sensitive. Warts are also treated with the remedy .
Symptoms better For the application of very hot 
water.
Symptoms worse For stress, for scratching  
the affected skin.The Latin name of this shrub derives from the ancient Greek kardia , or 
“heart,” inspired by the plant’s heart-shaped, shiny , black nut. The nut yields 
a milky juice that turns black after it is exposed to air. In southeast Asia this 
juice is combined with chalk to make an ink for marking patterns on fabric, 
hence the plant’s common name, the marking-nut tree. The homeopathic 
remedy Anacardium or .  was proved by Hahnemann in 1835. It is prescribed 
for both psychological and physical disorders.KEY SYMPTOMS lack of self-confidence • conflict of wills • sensation as if there is  
a plug in the anus, gut, or chest • poor memory • itching, burning skin eruptions MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
See also Indigestion,  page 234 ; Hemorrhoids,  page 238 ; Constipation,  page 238 ; Eczema,  page 240Chest pain
SYMPTOMS Sharp or pricking pain in the heart, 
possibly with a sense of pressure in the chest, 
as if it is bound by tight bands or weighed 
down by a small plug. An uneasy sensation 
may develop in the chest, possibly  
involving palpitations.
Symptoms better For inhaling fresh  
air outdoors.
Symptoms worse A few hours after eating.SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Indian 
subcontinent, and found growing in dry, 
mountainous forest areas.
BACKGROUND
Arabian physicians traditionally used the juice 
of the marking nut to treat mental illness, 
memory loss, paralysis, and spasms.
PREPARATION
The ripe, dried fruit is macerated in  
alcohol for at least ﬁve days, before  
being ﬁltered and then repeatedly diluted 
and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Marking-nut tree.MARKING NUTS In India the juice of the  
marking nut was traditionally used as a  
remedy for burning off warts.36•

ARNICAArnica montana
REMEDY PROFILE
People who respond best to this remedy 
may actually deny that they are ill, ignoring 
the severity of their condition. They 
generally prefer to be left alone and tend  
to be agitated, restless, and morose. Poor 
concentration and forgetfulness are typical, 
as are nightmares and a morbid imagination.
Arnica  is usually given as a first-aid 
remedy following an accident, surgery, 
bereavement, childbirth, or dental 
treatment. It is also used for joint pain, 
fever, and some skin problems.
Shock, injury & postoperative 
care
SYMPTOMS  Acute and chronic consequences 
of shock, injury, or surgery, particularly 
bleeding, bruising, swelling, and aching 
pains. The body may feel battered and 
highly sensitive to discomfort, to the point 
where even a bed seems too hard. Arnica  
may also be prescribed to treat injuries such 
as a black eye or a foreign object in an eye, 
concussion, and nosebleeds.
Symptoms better  For lying down; for lying with 
the head lower than the feet.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for touch; 
for rest; for movement; for wine.
Post-childbirth pain
SYMPTOMS  Bruised, aching pain in the vagina 
that may be especially distressing at night.
Symptoms better  For lying down with the head 
lower than the feet.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touch;  
for movement. Tooth & gum pain
SYMPTOMS  Pain in the teeth or sore, bruised, 
and bleeding gums following injury or dental 
work may be treated with Arnica .
Symptoms better  For lying down.
Symptoms worse  For the slightest 
touch; for movement.
Joint & muscle pain
SYMPTOMS  Arthritic pain, sprains,  
or strains to the joints, which feel bruised, 
sore, and sensitive. Arnica  is also taken  
to ease swelling, bruising, and pain after  
a ligament tear or bone injury . Alternatively , it 
is used for aches in the muscles due to cramps, 
unaccustomed exercise, or overexertion.
Symptoms better  For lying down.
Symptoms worse  For the slightest touch;  
for movement.
Fever
SYMPTOMS  A hot head, cold body , and 
exhaustion. Stools, flatulence, and perspiration 
tend to have a characteristic odor of rotten eggs, 
and there may be incontinence of stools and 
urine. Arnica  is also prescribed for recurring 
fevers such as typhoid or malarial fever.
Symptoms better  For lying down; for lying  
with the head lower than the feet.
Symptoms worse  For cold surroundings;  
for damp; for the slightest touch.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Hard, dry , swollen skin due to insect 
bites, bed sores, small, painful boils, red, 
blistering skin eruptions, or varicose ulcers.
Symptoms better  For lying down.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for touch.The healing properties of this aromatic perennial have been recognized  
for over 400 years. Arnica is anti-inflammatory and promotes tissue repair.  
It has been used extensively in European folk medicine as an external remedy 
for muscle pain, and was once also prescribed as an internal treatment for 
dysentery and gout. Potentially toxic, its internal use is now largely limited  
to homeopathy. Proved by Hahnemann and published in his Materia Medica 
Pura (1821–34), Arnica  is used to promote healing and help control bleeding. 
It is used mostly for shock, injury, and pain.KEY SYMPTOMS trauma • bruising • postoperative care • tendency to deny illness  
• bruised, sore feeling • bed seems too hard
See also Circulation,  pages 184 , 230; Breast problems,  page 201 ; Grief,  page 213 ; Men’s health,  page 264 ; Dizziness,  page 266MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
ORIGIN
Grows in alpine pastures and woodlands  
of the Pyrenees, Siberia, and central  
Europe, especially Switzerland  
and Germany.
BACKGROUND
Traditionally used externally as an ointment 
to improve local blood supply and speed 
healing in the treatment of bruises, sprains, 
and muscle pain.
PREPARATION
The whole ﬂowering plant, including the  
root, is steeped in alcohol, ﬁltered,  
diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Arnica, leopard’s bane, sneezewort,  
mountain tobacco, mountain daisy.ARNICA Climbers  
used to chew arnica  
leaves to relieve aching 
muscles, or drink  
an infusion following injury.
FLOWERING 
STEMFlower causes 
sneezing when freshly 
crushed and inhaled
SOURCE DETAILSROOTLeaves are 
soft and 
covered in 
fine down•37

38•
Artemisia cina syn. A. maritima ‘Linn’
CINA
REMEDY PROFILE
Cina is typically perceived as a children’s remedy , 
and is given for intestinal worms or muscle 
twitches, associated with great irritability when 
scolded or in discomfort. Those affected cannot 
bear to be touched, held, or even observed— 
they often consider themselves ugly . Restlessness, 
a frantic state of mind, picking the nose, and 
grinding the teeth are typical symptoms in those 
for whom Cina is appropriate. Sleep is often 
fitful and plagued by night terrors. All symptoms 
may be worse at night.
These people may have an “anxiety of 
conscience,” a groundless feeling of having 
done something wrong, which manifests itself 
as touchiness and obstinacy . They may be 
survivors of childhood abuse.
In addition to its primary use for worms, 
Cina has also been given to treat convulsions 
and seizures in children. Today it is still given 
as a treatment for worms, as well as for 
temper tantrums, violent coughing, muscle 
twitches, and sleep problems in children.
Intestinal worms
SYMPTOMS  Worms evident in whitish-colored 
stools. Cutting, pinching pain is felt in the 
belly , which may be bloated. There is an urge 
to grind the teeth at night, and to pick the 
nose and scratch the rectum, which are both 
itchy . The appetite may be nonexistent, 
enormous, or changeable, with potential 
cravings for sweet foods. There is often 
intense irritability and great restlessness.
Symptoms better  For movement; for  
bending down.
Symptoms worse  For heat in summer; at night; 
for touch.Temper tantrums
SYMPTOMS  Extreme irritability in children, 
especially chubby ones with variable appetites. 
Tantrums may be due to being scolded or to 
worms  (see left) . T ypical Cina symptoms such 
as teeth-grinding may be present.
Symptoms better  For lying on the abdomen;  
for being carried.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for being stared at.
Coughs & colds
SYMPTOMS  Whooping cough or severe, gagging 
cough, with limb spasms before a coughing fit. 
The chest feels constricted, making breathing 
difficult. Speaking or sudden movement may 
trigger coughing. In children the body tends  
to stiffen prior to a coughing fit. Violent sneezing 
may cause pressure build-up in the head, and 
the nose may be alternately blocked and runny . 
There may be an urge to pick the nose, and 
nosebleeds often result. Intense ill-humor  
and irritability are often evident.
Symptoms better  For being still; in the daytime.
Symptoms worse  For getting up; for walking out 
of doors; during sleep; at night.
T witching muscles
SYMPTOMS  Jerking muscles and spasms, 
especially in the hands and feet, associated 
with irritability . Cina is often used if twitching 
or convulsions are triggered by touch or by 
being scolded.
Symptoms better  For bending down.
Symptoms worse  For touch; at night; for heat  
in summer.
Sleep problems
SYMPTOMS  Difficulty in falling asleep, or 
restless sleep with twitching, jerking limbs.Purportedly named after Artemisia, the queen of Persia in the 4th century BCE  
who was renowned for her botanical skills, this family of plants has been valued 
by many medicinal traditions, from ancient Roman to Chinese. Artemisia cina  was 
identified as a remedy for intestinal worms by the ancient Greeks, and its active 
constituent, santonin, is still used in worm medicines. In 1829 Cina was proved 
by Hahnemann, who felt that the plant’s “valuable curative properties”  
went well beyond its traditional role in herbalism.KEY SYMPTOMS teeth-grinding • irritability and touchiness • temper tantrums • ravenous 
appetite • desire to lie on the hands and knees • itchy nose that is constantly rubbedMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
See also Temper tantrums,  page 246Symptoms better  For being rocked violently;  
for lying on the hands and knees.
Symptoms worse  For night terrors; for being 
turned over.LEVANT 
WORMSEED The 
bluish gray leaves of 
this aromatic plant 
give off a strong scent 
when crushed, but have 
a very bitter taste.Flowers form 
in round, tiny 
tufts
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to a wide area ranging from the 
eastern Mediterranean to Siberia. Prefers 
semi-arid growing conditions.
BACKGROUND
Dried, unopened ﬂower heads have been 
used since ancient times in preparations for 
expelling intestinal worms. The bitter plant 
has also been used as a digestive stimulant.
PREPARATION
Unopened ﬂower heads (called “seeds”)  
are harvested in fall, coarsely powdered, 
macerated in alcohol, diluted,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Levant wormseed, European wormseed, 
Tartarian southernwood.

•39
BELLADONNAAtropa belladonna
REMEDY PROFILE
Belladonna  is a major remedy for acute 
illnesses of sudden, violent onset. It is usually 
given to people who are generally fit and 
energetic, but restless and agitated when ill. 
They are prone to sudden, explosive anger, 
marked by the desire to strike out or even  
to bite.
T ypical symptoms linked with Belladonna  
include high fever, dilated pupils, flushed,  
dry skin, and throbbing pain, particularly  
in the head, due to rapid blood circulation. 
There is often hypersensitivity to light, 
noise, and touch, and also to rapid 
temperature changes.
Belladonna  is typically given for acute pain, 
inflammation, or infection, chiefly of the 
upper respiratory tract. It may also be used  
to treat menstrual pain, sunstroke, febrile 
convulsions, cystitis, nephritis (inflamed 
kidneys), teething pain, and mastitis during 
breast-feeding.
Acute fever & pain
SYMPTOMS  Sudden onset of high fever and 
hypersensitivity in all the senses. The face 
may be hot, flushed, and dry, with bright 
eyes and dilated pupils. Although the lips 
and mouth remain pale, the tongue is often 
bright red. Any inflammation is red, radiates 
heat, and throbs painfully. Fever is 
commonly followed by perspiration, and 
may develop into delirium. There is little 
thirst, or just a craving for sour drinks.
Other symptoms include throbbing pain  
in the eyes, which are swollen, red, and sensitive to light; a tearing, pounding pain 
deep in the ear; and a pulsating headache   
(see below) .
Symptoms better  For warm rooms; for sitting  
or standing erect; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For noise; for touch; for 
movement; for lying down; for drafts.
Sore throat & dry cough
SYMPTOMS  Constricted, dry , burning throat,  
a tender neck, and red, swollen tonsils, 
notably on the right side. There may be  
a painful, racking cough and fever  (see left) .
Symptoms better  For warm rooms; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For cold drafts; around  
3 p.m.; for swallowing foods or drinks.
Headache & migraine
SYMPTOMS  Violent, throbbing pain. During  
a migraine, pain starts in the back of the head, 
radiates to the right brow area, and settles 
behind the eye.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the head;  
for lying in the dark; for cold compresses.
Symptoms worse  For light; for noise; for 
movement; for wet hair; for menstruating.
Menstrual pain
SYMPTOMS  Menstrual flow is extremely heavy 
and painful. The blood is hot and may be 
bright red or clotted.
Symptoms better  For standing or sitting erect.
Symptoms worse  For the slightest movement.This deadly genus is named after the Greek Fate Atropos, 
who held the power of life and death over mortals. In the 
16th century , Italian ladies used deadly nightshade to make 
their eyes sparkle, hence bella donna , which is Italian  
for “beautiful woman.” Belladonna  was one of the first 
homeopathic remedies, developed in 1799 by Hahnemann  
for scarlet fever, after he observed that symptoms of deadly 
nightshade poisoning closely matched those of scarlet fever.KEY SYMPTOMS hot, flushed, red face • high fever  
• delirium • desire for sour things • sensitivity to light, 
noise, and movement
See also Rosacea,  page 193 ; Influenza,  page 224 ; Children’s health,  page 246 ; Breast-feeding problems,  page 262MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Purple, bell-shaped 
flowers give way to 
black berries in fall
Leaves have weaker effect than 
root, and for this reason are 
preferred for herbal medicines
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Europe, western Asia, north Africa, 
and North America, but now cultivated 
worldwide. Thrives in chalky soil, woods,  
and wasteland.
BACKGROUND
Used traditionally for swelling and 
inﬂammations, colic, and ulcers. It  
formed part of a sleeping potion in Chaucer’s 
time and, six centuries later, provides an 
anesthetic still used in  
conventional medicine.
PREPARATION
As it comes into ﬂower, the whole fresh 
plant, including the root, is dug up. It is 
chopped and pounded to a pulp, then the 
juice is expressed. This juice is steeped  
in alcohol before being ﬁltered, diluted,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Deadly nightshade, belladonna, dwale,  
devil’s cherries, sorcerer’s cherry,  
witches’ berry.DEADLY NIGHTSHADE Despite 
this plant’s poisonous nature, 
it has been used as an 
antispasmodic, relaxant, and 
sedative in herbalism, and for 
acute inflammation, pain, and 
fever in homeopathy.

40•
Baptisia tinctoria
BAPTISIA
REMEDY PROFILE
Baptisia  is prescribed almost exclusively for 
acute feverish illness with a characteristic 
set of symptoms. These include confusion 
or even stupor, as though drunk. The 
lethargy or exhaustion brought on by illness 
is so profound that the person even falls 
asleep during conversations. Nightmares 
and delirium are common, notably  
a sensation that the body is scattered in 
pieces. This feeling can lead to difficulty  
in falling asleep, as can sensations of 
suffocation or breathlessness.
T ypical physical symptoms include foul 
breath, a yellowy-brown tongue, and  
a bitter-tasting mouth. The face may be 
swollen and flushed dark red, with 
drooping eyelids.
First developed for typhoid fever, Baptisia  
is now used mostly for acute fever, severe 
influenza, and gastrointestinal infections, as 
well as for sore throats and septic infections.
Acute fever
SYMPTOMS  A high fever or influenza, often  
of sudden onset, alternating with severe 
chills. The face may be darkly flushed;  
the tongue tends to be deep red or even 
brown in color, and is possibly coated  
and dry down the center. Great lethargy 
may accompany these symptoms, with the 
body feeling tender and bruised and the 
muscles sore, stiff, and heavy. The bed  
may feel too hard, resulting in bouts  
of restlessness and curling up tightly  
in order to try to ease discomfort.
Symptoms better  For being indoors.Symptoms worse  For being in the open air;  
for cold, wind, fog, and humid heat; upon 
waking; for walking.
Intestinal infections
SYMPTOMS  Exhausting attacks of diarrhea,  
with acute fever  (see below, left)  and possibly 
even delirium. The tongue may have a 
yellowish coating and there may be a bitter 
taste in the mouth. Stools are particularly 
foul-smelling and cause painful irritation 
around the anus. There may also be blood  
in the stools and a pink rash on the abdomen, 
possibly indicating typhoid fever.
Symptoms better  For being indoors; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For walking in the open air.
Throat infections
SYMPTOMS  Stupor, flushing, and fever  (see 
left). The throat is sore, and the tonsils may 
be dark red and swollen. The gums and 
throat may be affected by ulcers, which are 
not necessarily painful. The lips may be blue, 
cracked, or bleeding. Swallowing solid food 
without gagging may be impossible, but 
drinking small amounts of liquid is bearable. 
A marked thirst and copious drinking may 
be followed by the scant passage of urine. A 
related ear infection may be quick to set in, 
especially in the right ear.
Symptoms better  For being indoors; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For walking in the open air.
Septic conditions
SYMPTOMS  Foul-smelling ulcers in the mouth 
and throat, with a foul-smelling discharge. 
The breath, sweat, and urine may have an 
offensive odor. The symptoms set in  The famous indigo dye obtained from this plant is reflected in its  
name, tinctoria , from the Latin tingere , “to dye.” Wild indigo was used  
medicinally by American Indians and by New World settlers, primarily  
as an antiseptic wash for wounds. Modern herbalists use it internally  
and externally as an antiseptic and immune-system stimulant. The 
homeopathic remedy was proved in a small-scale trial in the 1850s  
by Drs. Douglas, Hadley , Burt, and others, and introduced into  
the repertory by Dr. Thompson in 1857.KEY SYMPTOMS  severe infection • confusion and stupor • sensation that the body 
is scattered in pieces • aversion to open air • offensive-smelling dischargesMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
See also Influenza,  page 224 ; Sore throats, page 226 ; Mouth ulcers,  page 232 ; Diarrhea,  page 238rapidly, with stupor and fatigue, and may  
be due to an incomplete miscarriage, or  
to septicemia or other septic states marked 
by acute fever.
Symptoms better  For being indoors; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For walking in the open air.New root 
shoots form 
with purple 
tips
Root can 
cause nausea 
and vomiting 
if taken in 
excess
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to eastern North America, growing 
from Canada down to North Carolina. 
Generally found in woods and clearings,  
and prefers dry, hilly terrain.
BACKGROUND
Traditionally used in North America as a 
decoction for fever and infection, a wash for 
wounds, a poultice for snake bites, and a 
gargle to soothe sore throats.
PREPARATION
Fresh root, including the bark, is pulped and 
left to steep in alcohol for eight days. The 
resulting tincture is then repeatedly diluted 
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Wild indigo, indigo weed, horseﬂy weed, 
rattleweed.WILD INDIGO This root has 
traditionally been harvested  
as a source of indigo blue dye, 
although it is considered inferior  
to the dye produced by the tropical 
species of indigo plant.

•41
BERBERISBerberis vulgaris
REMEDY PROFILE
People who respond well to Berberis  are 
prone to lethargy, inertia, and listlessness. 
They can find it difficult to sustain any 
mental effort or to think straight. They  
can be especially anxious at twilight, when 
objects may appear larger than life and 
distorted so that they may be mistaken  
for monsters.
T ypical physical symptoms for those who 
need Berberis  include pallor, hollow eyes and 
cheeks, and dry mucous membranes. Berberis  
is given for a particular type of pain, typically 
described as deep, sharp, neuralgic or colicky 
pain radiating outward, and often shifting 
from one part of the body to another. This 
type of sudden pain is often linked with 
kidney infection, arthritis, or gout. Berberis  
has a strong affinity with the urinary and 
digestive systems, and is used mainly in the 
treatment of kidney disorders.
Kidney disorders
SYMPTOMS  Kidney infection with tenderness and 
pain in the kidney area, as if water is trying to 
bubble through the skin. Urine is dark yellow  
or green with a reddish, branlike sediment. 
Berberis  may help kidney stones with severe, 
sharp, neuralgic or colicky pain radiating from 
the kidneys to the bladder and down the legs.
Symptoms better  For rest; for lying on the 
painful side.
Symptoms worse  For standing; for movement; 
for sudden jarring or jolts.Cystitis
SYMPTOMS Burning or sharp, cutting pains from 
the bladder to the urethra, with green or dark 
yellow urine that contains a reddish, branlike 
sediment. Pain from the spermatic cord to the 
testes may make sexual intercourse painful.
Symptoms better  After urinating.
Symptoms worse  On urinating; for standing.
Gallbladder problems
SYMPTOMS  Sharp, radiating, tearing pain in the 
area of the gallbladder, extending toward the 
stomach. Colic may cause a stabbing, stitchlike 
pain that radiates from the liver area. There may 
be an inflamed gallbladder or gallstones with 
associated biliary colic (pain in the upper 
abdomen), which may sometimes develop into 
jaundice with pale stools.
Symptoms better  For rest.
Symptoms worse  For pressure on the upper 
abdomen; for standing; for movement.
Lower-back pain
SYMPTOMS  Pain in the lower back that radiates 
outward or down the thigh, accompanied by 
stiffness and possibly by a stitch in the 
abdomen or the side of the body .
Symptoms better  For rest.
Symptoms worse  For lying; for sitting; for 
standing; for movement; for treading heavily 
while going down stairs.
Joint pain
SYMPTOMS  General joint and muscle aches  
in the arms and legs, with sharp pains radiating This strongly astringent and healing plant was used by ancient Greek  
and Arabian physicians to cool the blood during fevers and to treat jaundice 
and gastrointestinal disorders, while American Indians used it for peptic 
ulcers. Western herbalists give barberry for liver problems caused by drug  
or alcohol abuse, and Ayurvedic doctors advocate it as a detoxicant and liver 
tonic. In traditional Chinese medicine it is taken for diarrhea. Barberry 
contains alkaloids that are thought to inhibit cancer. It exhibits a broad 
spectrum of antimicrobial activity. The homeopathic remedy was proved by  
Dr. Hesse in 1835, and is taken largely for urinary and digestive disorders 
with sharp or colicky pain.KEY SYMPTOMS  colicky kidney pains • radiating pains • lethargy and listlessness  
• colicky pains in the region of the gallbladder
See also Gastroenteritis,  page 236 ; Cystitis,  page 260MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
BARBERRY The astringent  
and antiseptic properties of this 
bitter herb make it an effective 
digestive tonic for gastrointestinal 
infections and peptic ulcers.Berries are extremely 
sour and were used 
in the past to make 
preserves and 
picklesAll parts  
of barberry  
plant are harmful  
if eaten, except  
red berries
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Europe and naturalized in North 
America. Grows wild in woods and hedges, 
and on bushy chalk hills, and is commonly 
cultivated as a garden plant or herb.
BACKGROUND
Traditionally used in many cultures to treat 
digestive and gallbladder complaints, and 
also thought to lower fever, control bleeding, 
and reduce inﬂammation.
PREPARATION
The bark of the small or medium-sized root 
branches is dried and chopped, then steeped 
in alcohol, ﬁltered, diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Barberry, pipperidge bush.
outward and down the limbs. Gout and arthritic 
pain may also respond to Berberis .
Symptoms better  In the afternoon.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for treading 
heavily while going down stairs.

42•
Bryonia alba
BRYONIA
REMEDY PROFILE
Bryonia  is mainly used for people who are 
highly irritable when ill. Often clean-living, 
meticulous individuals, they can be contrary 
and capricious if ill, wanting things that,  
when given, are promptly rejected. They  
may feel tired, taciturn, languid, and angry  
if disturbed. Anxiety is common, especially 
about financial security .
The chief physical symptom treated by 
Bryonia  is pain felt on the slightest movement. 
It is often accompanied by infrequent spells  
of great thirst, and dry lips, mouth, and eyes. 
Illness sets in slowly , typically after 
overexposure to heat or cold. Bryonia  is  
useful for chest inflammation, pneumonia, 
bad headaches, and rheumatic pains. It may 
also be taken for some forms of constipation 
and breast pain.
Dry coughs
SYMPTOMS  Great dryness in the mouth, throat, 
chest, and mucous membranes, with a tickly 
cough and sharp chest pains. Pressing the 
chest during a coughing fit may alleviate pain 
in the head, chest, or rib cage, as may lying 
still and breathing gently . Coughs may be 
linked to colds, pleurisy , or bronchitis.
Symptoms better  For rest; for lying still;  
for pressure on the chest.
Symptoms worse  For warm rooms; in the 
morning; for deep breathing; for movement;  
for eating and drinking.
Colds & influenza
SYMPTOMS  Red, sore, swollen nose, a hoarse, 
constricted throat, and a dry cough  (see 
above) . The lips are often cracked and itchy , KEY SYMPTOMS  pain upon the slightest movement • dry mucous membranes  
• great thirst • anxiety about financial security • irritabilityMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Grows mainly in hedges and woodlands  
of southern England, and in central  
and southern Europe.
BACKGROUND
Used traditionally for shortness of breath, 
coughing, and the clearing of phlegm from 
the chest.
PREPARATION
The fresh root is unearthed before  
the plant ﬂowers, chopped, pulped, 
macerated in alcohol for ten days,  
diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Bryony, white bryony, wild hops.
See also Breast problems,  page 201 ; Bronchitis,  page 228 ; Coughs, page 228 ; Constipation, page 238 ; Breast pain,  page 258and the mouth is dry , with a white-coated 
tongue. Sharp, shooting ear pains may 
develop, as may sore eyes with sensitivity  
to movement and heavy eyelids. There may  
be an intense, aching headache  (see below) , 
raging thirst, and copious perspiration.
Symptoms better  For rest.
Symptoms worse  For bending forward;  
for movement.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Bursting, splitting headache over 
the forehead or left eye, so that even moving 
the eyeball hurts. Pain extends to the back of 
the head, then the whole head, often lasting 
all day . The mouth may be dry , and there may 
be great thirst.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses; for 
pressure on the head; for closing the eyes.
Symptoms worse  For eye or body movement; 
for drinking while hot; for overeating.
Joint pain
SYMPTOMS  Joints and muscles are hot, swollen, 
stiff, and prone to stabbing pain, usually  
due to gout, tenosynovitis, or arthritis, or  
after an injury .
Symptoms better  For heat; for pressure on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold compresses; for the 
slightest movement; for jarring.
Constipation
SYMPTOMS  Large, hard stools that look black  
or burned. The rectum may be particularly dry , BRYONY  The root of this  
plant, which is a member  
of the gourd family, has  
a bitter taste and unpleasant  
smell. In excessive amounts, it  
can cause death within hours, usually  
from inflammation of the digestive tract.WHOLE ROOTDioscorides, the famous Greek physician of the 1st century CE,  
advocated bryony for gangrenous wounds, and the ancient Greeks and 
Romans also used it for epilepsy , vertigo, paralysis, gout, and coughs.  
In 17th-century England the herbalist Culpeper found bryony useful  
for phlegm, coughs, and shortness of breath. In 1834 Hahnemann 
proved the homeopathic remedy , which is used mostly for slow-
starting ailments accompanied by pain on the slightest movement.
with burning pain after passing a stool. Rumbly , 
colicky pains in the abdomen are common.
Symptoms better  For rest.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; in the 
morning; for movement; for cold drinks.
Breast problems
SYMPTOMS  Breasts are pale, hard, and hot, with 
sharp pains, particularly in women who are 
pregnant or breast-feeding. Milk supply may 
be excessive.
Symptoms better  For heat; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For movement.Fresh root can cause 
severe skin irritation

•43
CANNABIS IND.Cannabis sativa ‘Indica’
REMEDY PROFILE
The behavior of those who benefit most from 
Cannabis ind.  alternates between sweet and 
gentle, and desperate or even paranoid. 
T ypical physical symptoms include a marked 
increase in appetite and thirst, especially for 
sweet foods and cold drinks.
Cannabis ind.  is prescribed primarily to treat 
abnormal psychological states, such as 
confusion, disorientation, loss of memory , 
overexcitement, unwarranted fears, or 
paranoia. The remedy is also given for 
physical conditions such as headaches, 
urinary-tract infections, and pain in the legs.
Disordered mental states
SYMPTOMS  Marked swings in thought and 
mood between a gentle state and paranoia. 
The gentle state is marked by mild euphoria, 
an overactive brain, and headstrong views, 
particularly about esoteric subjects such as 
astrology and UFOs. Wonderful and 
enlightening ideas occur in rapid succession, 
but they are equally quickly forgotten. The 
slightest thing may trigger hysterical giggling. 
Prophetic dreams, out-of-body experiences,  
or an apparent ability to predict the future 
may also be experienced. In the paranoid 
state, there is generally fear and anxiety , 
particularly a fear of losing control and 
becoming insane. There may be disorientation, 
memory loss, and confusion, even when  
in well-known environments. Travel or relocation may cause distress. Hallucinations 
that distort time, space, and distance are not 
uncommon.
Symptoms better  For open air; for rest;  
for walking.
Symptoms worse  For the dark; for tobacco;  
for coffee.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  An opening and closing sensation 
at the top of the head, as if shock waves are 
passing through the brain. The head may 
shake involuntarily and feel as if it is separate 
from the body . A stooping posture may be 
adopted due to a sensation of heavy pressure 
on the brain or to a migraine.
Symptoms better  For rest; for deep breathing.
Symptoms worse  For exertion; for tobacco;  
for alcohol; for coffee.
Urinary-tract infections
SYMPTOMS  A dull, burning, aching, or stitch-
like pain in the right kidney . Urine may be 
profuse and colorless, with erratic flow due to 
obstructed urination. There may be urethritis 
(inflammation of the urethra) with mucus 
discharge and burning, stinging pain.
Symptoms better  For rest; for deep breathing.
Symptoms worse  In the morning; for tobacco; 
for alcohol; for coffee.
Pain or paralysis in the legs
SYMPTOMS  Shooting pains that rise up the legs 
when walking. Exhaustion may follow even a KEY SYMPTOMS moods swing between overexcitement and paranoia • out-of-body 
experiences • burning pain in the urethra • “opening and shutting” sensations in the head
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to China and central western Asia, 
but now grown worldwide, although usually 
subject to legal restrictions.
BACKGROUND
Important in cultures such as ancient Egypt, 
China, and India, as a strong analgesic, 
sedative, and anti-inﬂammatory.
PREPARATION
The ﬂowering tops and seeds are ﬁnely 
chopped, macerated in alcohol for ten days, 
then ﬁltered, diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Marijuana, hashish, cannabis, Indian hemp, 
bhang bhanga.
See also Confusion , page 266MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Leaves are long 
and deeply 
serrated
very short walk. Alternatively , there may be  
a sensation of paralysis in the lower limbs. 
These symptoms are frequently accompanied 
by a backache.
Symptoms better  For rest; for deep breathing.
Symptoms worse  For walking; during 
menstruation.First mentioned in a Chinese herbal dating to 2700 BCE, marijuana has 
long been an important medicine in the herbal repertories of many 
cultures. By the 19th century, marijuana had become a standard  
painkiller in Europe. More recently, it has 
been prescribed as a conventional medicine 
in some countries to relieve nausea caused by 
chemotherapy and spasms due to multiple sclerosis. The 
plant is also an illegal recreational drug, and its prohibition extends  
to medicinal uses in many countries. The homeopathic remedy Cannabis 
ind. was proved by the American Provers’ Union in 1839 and introduced 
by Dr. Trinks in 1841.
CANNABIS  The active ingredient in this plant, 
tetrahydrocannabinol, causes mild euphoric 
effects when ingested or smoked.

44•
Carbo vegetabilis
CARBO VEG.
REMEDY PROFILE
People who need Carbo veg.  may be in a state 
of physical and mental collapse. It is used for 
debilitated states ranging from a simple faint 
or fatigue to exhaustion or more serious 
collapse. Those affected may never have fully 
recovered from a previous illness. Symptoms 
include extreme weariness on making the least 
effort, indifference, and anxiety at night, along 
with a fear of the supernatural.
T ypical physical symptoms include a cold, 
clammy body , a sallow face, weakness, and 
numbness or burning pain in the limbs.  
A tendency to suffer from trapped gas  
is common.
Despite usually feeling cold, people  
who respond to Carbo veg . like fresh air, 
especially if it is fanned over their faces. They 
may crave junk foods, coffee, sweets, and salt, 
and long for alcohol although it makes them 
feel unwell. In common with herbalists, 
homeopaths often give the remedy for 
flatulence and weak digestive functioning. 
Carbo veg . may also be taken for respiratory 
problems, or for a poor, sluggish constitution, 
particularly in the elderly .
Fatigue
SYMPTOMS  Weakness, severe exhaustion,  
or low vitality . The skin is cold and pale,  
but the body feels hot inside, and there is  
a bitter taste in the mouth. Carbo veg.  can  
be used for loss of vitality , fatigue, or shock 
during convalescence.
Symptoms better  For burping; for being fanned.
Symptoms worse  For warm, wet weather; in the 
evening; for lying down; for rich, fatty foods; for 
wine; for coffee.Chronic fatigue syndrome
Aching, burning pains all over the body , 
and swollen, tender glands. Confusion, 
difficulty in concentrating, and anxiety 
may be evident, along with other 
symptoms of fatigue  (see below, left) .
Symptoms better  In the afternoon; for  
lying down.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
at night; for exertion; for talking.
Indigestion & flatulence
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion and flatulence that occur 
regardless of diet. Regurgitation of food may be 
accompanied by sour burps, smelly gas, 
diarrhea, and bloating so that the skin of the 
stomach is stretched taut. Overeating may 
trigger nausea, dizziness, fainting, and morning 
headaches where the head feels heavy and hot.
Symptoms better  For cold, fresh air; for 
passing gas; for burping.
Symptoms worse  In the morning; for lying down; 
for rich, fatty foods; for milk, coffee, or wine.
Breathing problems
SYMPTOMS  Spasmodic cough, whooping 
cough, asthma, and bronchitis in the elderly . 
There may be cold perspiration and weakness, 
choking, gagging, and vomiting of mucus.  
A desire for fresh air is common, as is  
a feeling of suffocation.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for being 
fanned; for sitting up.
Symptoms worse  In warm, wet weather;  
for overheating; at night; for rich foods.
Poor circulation
SYMPTOMS  Reduced energy and lack  
of coordination due to poor circulation  Charcoal’s hardness and durability have in the past made it a popular material 
for staking out land boundaries. Its ability to absorb gases and toxins in the 
body gained charcoal a reputation as a “purifier,” and in the 18th and 19th 
centuries it was used in dressings for skin ulcers and in mouthwashes. 
Hahnemann proved and published the homeopathic remedy in his Chronic 
Diseases  (1821–34). It became known as the “corpse reviver” for its ability  
to restore severe collapse.KEY SYMPTOMS listless behavior • confusion • coldness • collapse • person feels 
better from fanned air • flatulence • desire for sweets, coffee, salt, and alcoholMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
See also Chronic fatigue syndrome,  page 205 ; Indigestion,  page 234 ; Bloating & flatulence,  page 236of oxygen around the body . The skin on the  
face, hands, and feet may be cold and blue. 
Hoarseness and a cold tongue and breath are 
common, and there may also be cold, puffy 
legs with a tendency for bleeding varicose 
veins to form.
Symptoms better  For cold, fresh air;  
for burping.
Symptoms worse  For lying down; in the 
evening; for milk, coffee, or fatty foods.CHARCOAL Wood is burned 
in a sealed environment 
from which air is excluded to 
make charcoal.
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Made from silver birch, beech, or poplar 
trees, which grow on moors, heaths, 
woodlands, and mountains throughout the 
Northern Hemisphere.
BACKGROUND
Used in traditional and conventional 
medicine for ulceration, septic diseases, 
ﬂatulence, and indigestion. Also known for 
its deodorant and disinfectant properties.
PREPARATION
Fist-sized bits of wood are cut, heated  
until red hot, and sealed in an airtight 
earthenware jar. The resulting ash is then 
triturated, diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Charcoal, wood charcoal.Charcoal is very 
hard and does 
not rot like 
ordinary wood

•45
IPECAC.Cephaelis ipecacuanha
REMEDY PROFILE
Irritability is common in those who respond 
best to Ipecac. , and children suited to the 
remedy may scream and howl. When unwell, 
these people can be capricious and hard to 
please, asking for things and then changing 
their minds. Illness can prompt them to 
become morose, depressed, impatient, and 
contemptuous of those around them.
Physical symptoms generally linked with 
Ipecac.  are persistent nausea, with or without 
vomiting, and a tendency to hemorrhage. 
Despite any vomiting, the tongue is clean and 
unfurred. There is often oversensitivity to 
movement and a constant feeling of being hot 
on the inside and cold on the outside. These 
symptoms appear rapidly , are generally 
intermittent, and may also include coughing 
fits and breathing difficulties. Ipecac.  is also 
used for headaches, migraines, and 
gynecological problems linked to the general 
tendency to bleed very easily .
Nausea & vomiting
SYMPTOMS  Persistent nausea that is not 
necessarily relieved by vomiting is a key 
symptom associated with Ipecac.  There is  
a bloated, swollen feeling in the abdomen, and 
cramping, colicky pain that may be most severe 
around the navel, while the stomach may seem 
to “flop” inside the abdomen. Vomit consists 
mostly of undigested food or bile. Belching and 
excess saliva production are common, the 
mouth remains moist, and there is little thirst. 
The tongue tends to be clean and unfurred. 
If gastroenteritis is the cause, there may be 
copious, watery , greenish-colored diarrhea  
that contains undigested food. If the skin is itchy , with sweat forming on the brow, then 
the symptom picture may indicate gallbladder 
problems. The nausea is very enervating,  
and may be accompanied by a weak pulse  
and fainting.
Symptoms better  For fresh air.
Symptoms worse For warmth; for lying down;  
for movement; for opiate drugs or tobacco;  
for eating.
Coughs & wheezing
SYMPTOMS An irritating, dry , rattling, loose 
cough, usually triggered by warm, humid 
weather. Breathing may be wheezy and 
asthmatic, and the chest may feel constricted. 
Although little phlegm may be produced, 
coughing may be violent and accompanied  
by nosebleeds, retching, gagging, nausea, 
vomiting, or coughing up of blood. These 
symptoms may be indicative of conditions 
such as bronchitis, whooping cough, and 
childhood asthma.
Symptoms better For fresh air; for sitting up.
Symptoms worse For heat and warmth; in the 
winter; for lying down; for movement.
Migraine
SYMPTOMS Migraine pain in the whole head, 
with severe nausea and vomiting. The  
pain extends to the face, teeth, and tongue. 
The face is pallid, or blue around the  
lips and eyes.
Symptoms better For fresh air.
Symptoms worse For warmth; for lying down;  
for movement; for stress; for embarrassment.
Gynecological problems
SYMPTOMS Extremely heavy menstrual flow , 
possibly with nausea and fainting. Between A Portuguese friar living in Brazil in the early 17th century first recorded  
the medicinal properties of ipecacuanha, a traditional remedy used by  
Brazilian Indians. Its name is from the Portuguese for “sick-making plant,”  
since in large doses it causes nausea, vomiting, and even cardiac failure.  
In conventional medicine, drugs derived from the root are used to loosen  
phlegm in the respiratory tract and to induce vomiting. Ipecac . was proved  
by Hahnemann in 1805 and is used especially to relieve persistent nausea.KEY SYMPTOMS persistent nausea and vomiting • clean, unfurred tongue  
• bright red bleeding • excessive mucus production and a cough • irritability
See also Asthma,  page 181 ; Nausea & vomiting,  page 236 ; Morning sickness,  page 262MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
IPECACUANHA This efficient expectorant is used  
in over-the-counter cough medicines and in 
homeopathic treatment for spasmodic coughs.Root is strongly emetic,  
and used to induce vomiting
menstrual periods there may be irregular 
spotting or a sudden, gushing flow from the 
uterus of bright red blood that proves slow to 
clot. Ipecac.  may also be prescribed for morning 
sickness, for hemorrhaging in connection with 
a displaced placenta, and for bleeding and 
nausea in the aftermath of a miscarriage.
Symptoms better For fresh air.
Symptoms worse During and after labor;  
for movement.SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Central and South America and 
cultivated particularly in Brazil; this plant’s 
preferred habitat is tropical rainforest.
BACKGROUND
A traditional Brazilian cure for dysentery  
that was brought to Europe in 1672,  
it is still used today by herbalists for 
amoebic dysentery.
PREPARATION
The root is dug up and the ﬁrmest dark 
rootlets dried, powdered, and macerated  
in alcohol. They are then ﬁltered, diluted, 
and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Ipecacuanha.

46•
Chamomilla recutita syn. Matricaria chamomilla
CHAMOMILLA
REMEDY PROFILE
Chamomilla  works best for those exhibiting an 
extremely low pain threshold, as well as anger, 
marked irritability , and hostility . Often 
hypersensitive, they are bad-tempered, easily 
offended, and impossible to please. They flush 
easily when angry , and hate being touched. 
Bad temper, anger, or stress exacerbate 
physical symptoms.
Chamomilla  is often given to children who 
are snappy , wail when ill, and are pacified 
only if being carried and cuddled by someone 
walking around.
T ypical Chamomilla  symptoms are great 
irritability and pain that seems unbearable. 
The remedy is given for teething pain, fever, 
stomach pain with diarrhea, menstrual or 
labor pains, and sore, inflamed nipples during 
breast-feeding.
Irritability
SYMPTOMS  Hypersensitivity to pain, and 
hostility and anger that triggers physical 
problems. Things may be demanded then 
promptly thrown away .
Symptoms better  For being carried;  
for perspiring.
Symptoms worse  For being touched; for being 
put down.
Toothaches, teething & 
earaches
SYMPTOMS  Excruciating pain in the teeth or 
ears, with fever  (see right) . Toothache flares 
up after a hot drink or if a tooth is pressed. 
Swollen glands may cause face and neck pain, and the ears, nose, and throat 
may feel blocked and numb. Babies 
teething may scream angrily, insist 
on being carried, and have  
greenish diarrhea.
Symptoms better  For cold; for  
being carried.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for warm 
foods and drinks.
Fever
SYMPTOMS  A hot, flushed state, often  
with one cheek red and the other pale. 
There may be irritability , shivering, and  
a tendency to sweat easily .
Symptoms better  For cold.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for warm foods  
and drinks.
Colic & diarrhea
SYMPTOMS  Colicky pain in the abdomen, 
possibly with pale green diarrhea that smells 
of rotten eggs. Colic in children may cause 
restlessness and arching of the back.
Symptoms better  For warm compresses on the 
abdomen; for fasting.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for fresh air;  
for anger.
Menstrual & labor pain
SYMPTOMS  Menstrual cramps or labor pains, 
possibly severe enough to cause sweats, 
anger, or fainting. Anger may trigger non-
menstrual bleeding.
Symptoms better  For being driven in a car.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for drafts; for wind; 
for damp; for anger; for touch.KEY SYMPTOMS irritability • hypersensitivity to pain • children want  
to be carried • teething problems • one cheek red and the  
other pale • greenish diarrheaMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Grows wild in much of temperate Europe 
and north Africa, and is naturalized in  
the US.
BACKGROUND
Used to treat disorders of the digestion 
since the 1st century CE. Chamomile tea  
is well known as a calming drink that  
aids sleep.
PREPARATION
The whole fresh plant is harvested when  
in ﬂower. It is ﬁnely chopped and macerated  
in alcohol, before being ﬁltered, diluted,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
German chamomile, corn feverfew,  
wild chamomile.
See also Toothaches,  page 232 ; Teething, page 246 ; Temper tantrums,  page 246 ; Sleeplessness,  page 248 ; Breast-feeding problems,  page 262The name of this plant derives from the Greek  chamaimelon , or “earth apple,” 
so called because of the applelike scent of its blossoms. Culpeper, the  
17th-century English herbalist, advocated chamomile for strengthening 
the uterus, especially after an arduous labor. Herbalists recommend it for 
external use as a poultice or cream for treating skin complaints such as 
eczema or burns. Chamomilla , proved by Hahnemann and published in his 
Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34), is used for ailments with extreme sensitivity 
to pain, especially in children.
Flowerheads 
contain oil that 
is used to treat 
hay fever and 
asthmaFlower heads 
can be infused 
to make a 
calming drink
GERMAN CHAMOMILE  The plant is 
used as an herbal remedy to relieve 
indigestion, menstrual pain, 
migraines, gout, and rheumatic pains.

•47
CHELIDONIUMChelidonium majus
REMEDY PROFILE
An aggressive, domineering personality is 
typically linked with Chelidonium . Those  
who respond well to the remedy tend also  
to be practical rather than intellectual people 
who do not like to “waste time” analyzing 
their emotions.
T ypical physical symptoms include 
cravings for hot drinks and cheese. There  
is a feeling of heaviness, with symptoms 
tending to be right-sided.
Chelidonium  is used mainly for liver 
conditions, or spleen, kidney , gallbladder, 
intestine, and lung complaints. It may also  
be given prior to surgery linked to hepatitis  
or gallstones.
Hepatitis
SYMPTOMS  An enlarged liver, with pain 
extending to the back and right shoulder 
blade, and jaundiced, yellow skin. The 
abdomen feels distended and tight, as if 
bound. There may be a strong craving for,  
or aversion to, cheese.
Symptoms better  For a hot bath; for passing 
stools; for pressure on the affected area; for 
hot foods and drinks, such as hot milk.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the right side; 
around 4 a.m. or 4 p.m.
Gallstones
SYMPTOMS  A sharp, constant pain on the 
upper right side of the abdomen, behind the 
ribs, possibly due to a gallstone trapped in  
a bile duct. The pain may resemble that of 
hepatitis  (see above) . It is often exacerbated  by fatty foods, and may extend to the  
back and right shoulder blade  (see below) . 
There may be nausea and vomiting, and 
inflammation of the bile duct that may  
lead to jaundice or inflammation of  
the gallbladder.
Symptoms better  For a hot bath; for passing 
stools; for pressure on the affected area; for 
hot foods and drinks, such as hot milk.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the right side; 
around 4 a.m. and 4 p.m.; for fatty foods.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  A sensation of heaviness on  
the right side of the head. There may also 
be facial numbness and neuralgia (especially 
above the eye), and a yellow-coated tongue 
that retains teethmarks. These symptoms 
may be linked to an existing liver disorder  
(see left) .
Symptoms better  For a hot bath; for bending 
backward; for pressure on the affected area; 
for hot foods and drinks.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the right side;  
for movement; around 4 a.m. and 4 p.m.
Shoulder pain
SYMPTOMS  Shoulder pain with icy coldness 
in the fingertips and muscles that feel sore 
to the touch. There may be associated 
nausea and perspiration.
Symptoms better  For having a hot bath;  
for pressure on the affected area; for  
bending backward.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the right side;  
for movement; for coughing; around 4 a.m.  
and 4 p.m.KEY SYMPTOMS right-sided complaints • practical, 
dominant nature • pain in the right shoulder blade 
• liver and gallbladder problems • person  
feels better for hot drinks and eating
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Europe, north Africa, and western 
Asia, and now naturalized in North America. 
Grows on banks and in hedgerows.
BACKGROUND
Used in Western and Chinese herbalism as 
a muscle relaxant and antispasmodic, and 
to clear cataracts.
PREPARATION
The whole ﬂowering plant, or the root, is 
chopped, pulped, and macerated in alcohol 
for at least ten days.
COMMON NAMES
Greater celandine, wartweed, swallow wort.
See also Cancer , page 208MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Pneumonia
SYMPTOMS  Breathlessness and pain on 
coughing or breathing deeply , with 
pneumonia that chiefly affects the right  
lung and, possibly , liver problems.
Symptoms better  For hot foods and drinks.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for lying on the 
right side; for movement; for coughing; around 
4 a.m. and 4 p.m.Because this plant flowers as the swallows 
are migrating, Dioscorides, the famous 
Greek physician of the 1st century CE, named it after 
the Greek khelidon , or “swallow.” In traditional medicine its 
juice was used for skin, liver, and gallbladder disorders. The 
homeopathic remedy was proved by Hahnemann and published in his 
Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34).  
GREATER CELANDINE  The freshly crushed plant 
exudes a sticky, orange sap, which herbalists use  
to treat warts and corns.Yellow flowers resemble 
poppies, which belong to same 
plant family

48•
Cimicifuga racemosa
CIMICIFUGA
REMEDY PROFILE
Primarily a women’s remedy , Cimicifuga  is 
particularly suited to those whose emotions 
swing between overexcitement and depression. 
They tend to have very intense emotional lives, 
possibly marked by fears of death and insanity . 
Emotional symptoms often alternate with 
physical ones, such as chilliness and sharp 
pains, especially on the left side of the body . 
Symptoms may intensify during menstruation.
Cimicifuga  acts upon the nerves and  
uterine muscles. It is prescribed mostly  
for gynecological problems; for head, neck, 
and back pain; and for emotional symptoms.
Menopause
SYMPTOMS  Severe hot flashes, fainting spells, 
and other typical menopausal symptoms, but 
in an extreme form. Depression and irrational 
fears are common  (see below, right) .
Symptoms better  For open air; for bending 
double; for gentle movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for sitting; for 
emotional stress.
Menstrual problems
SYMPTOMS  Heavy menstrual flow, with dark-
red, clotted blood, shooting, cramping pains 
radiating across the pelvis into the thighs, and 
bearing-down pains in the lower back. 
Menstruation is often too frequent, too early , 
or absent. Before menstruation there may be 
burning breast pain and congestion in the 
head. Premenstrual syndrome, depression   
(see right) , and irrational fears are commonly 
associated with the remedy .Symptoms better  For open air; for bending 
double; for gentle movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for sitting;  
for stress.
Pregnancy
SYMPTOMS  Vomiting, nausea, and lack of sleep. 
Lower back pain and a bruised feeling all over 
the body are common, with abdominal pains 
shooting from side to side. There may be 
depression and irrational fears  (see below) . 
Cimicifuga  may also be prescribed for 
protracted labor and recovery from an  
early miscarriage.
Symptoms better  For open air; for bending 
double; for gentle movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for sitting; for 
emotional stress.
Head & neck pain
SYMPTOMS  Headaches in the top or side of  
the head, which may dull thought, or pain  
or stiffness in the neck or nape of the neck, 
which may radiate to the upper back  
or shoulders.
Symptoms better  For open air; for wrapping up; 
for lying flat; for pressure on the neck and head.
Symptoms worse  For cold, wind, drafts, and 
damp; for weather changes; for physical strain; 
for menstruating; for menopause; at night.
Depression
SYMPTOMS  Black moods and heavy sighing, 
alternating with euphoria, loquaciousness,  
and a tendency to jump from topic to topic. 
Possible fears of insanity and death worsen 
with the onset of menopause. Cimicifuga  may KEY SYMPTOMS  depression • neck and back pain • fear  
of death • overexcitability • menstrual irregularitiesMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
See also Depression,  page 212 ; Headaches, page 218 ; Painful periods,  page 256 ; Heavy periods,  page 258also be given for postpartum depression, 
especially when accompanied by feelings  
of imprisonment.
Symptoms better  For open air; for  
gentle movement.
Symptoms worse  For menstruating;  
for pregnancy; after giving birth; for  
menopause.This North American plant’s genus name is derived 
from the Latin words cimex , “bug,” and fugere , “to 
flee,” a reference to its properties as an insect 
repellent. Native Americans used the root to treat 
gynecological problems, and its beneficial effect 
on conditions arising during menopause was 
confirmed in German studies published in 1995. 
Cimicifuga  was proved in 1852 by Drs. Hempel, Wells, 
Paine, and Mears, a team of US homeopaths.
BLACK COHOSH  Contemporary German research 
has shown that herbal preparations containing 
black cohosh ease hot flashes, affirming the 
plant’s traditional herbal use.
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Indigenous to Canada and eastern parts  
of the US, but now also grown in Europe. 
Prefers moist, shady conditions, such as 
those to be found in woods and hedgerows.
BACKGROUND
Traditionally used by native Americans for 
health problems in women. Used in 
contemporary herbal medicine as a sedative 
and antidepressant.
PREPARATION
Fresh root and rhizome are harvested in fall. 
They are pounded to a pulp, then mixed with 
alcohol and left to stand before being 
strained, ﬁltered, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Black cohosh, black snakeroot, rattleroot, 
cohosh bugbane, squawroot.Unpleasant-smelling root 
can be toxic in high doses

•49
CHINACinchona officinalis
REMEDY PROFILE
China  is thought to work best for idealistic, 
artistic people. Despite problems articulating 
their feelings, they prefer meaningful talk  
to trivial chat, but their own intensity often 
tires them, causing irritability, laziness, 
depression, violence, or intolerance. Easily 
offended, they may feel paranoid and 
mistreated, or that they have been born 
unfortunate, as if the world is hostile to 
them. A highly active imagination can lead 
to a preoccupation with future plans and  
to egocentric, heroic fantasies that later  
cause embarrassment.
Physical symptoms may be linked to 
weaknesses in the liver and digestive system 
and generally include a dislike of butter and 
other fatty foods, and cravings for alcohol and 
foods that are sweet or spicy .
The remedy is used for exhaustion 
following illness or extreme fluid loss. It is 
also given for fever, insomnia, gastric upsets, 
and headaches.
Exhaustion
SYMPTOMS  Extreme lethargy , with weak, jumpy 
muscles, and oversensitivity to noises, smells, 
and touch. Fatigue can be due to extensive fluid 
loss caused by diarrhea, severe vomiting, or 
possibly breast-feeding. It can also be a result  
of anemia, possibly linked to blood loss or heavy 
menstrual flow , or to debilitating illness, such as 
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS).
Symptoms better  For lying down.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for noise;  
for walking.Fever
SYMPTOMS  Intermittent high temperature 
with shivering chills and profuse sweats. 
Thirst may be absent during sweats, but  
is marked with the chills. The skin may  
be sallow or flushed, and sensitive to the 
slightest touch.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for sleep; for 
firm pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for drafts; at night; 
in fall.
Insomnia
SYMPTOMS  Sleeplessness due to excited 
thoughts and heroic fantasies. Even the 
slightest noise disrupts sleep. The mind tends 
to be very clear in the evening and at night.
Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for drafts.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion accompanied by 
ineffectual burping and a sensation that food 
is stuck behind the breastbone. The abdomen 
may feel bloated. Gas that is difficult to expel 
may cause pain or, alternatively , pain may 
remain even after expulsion of gas. There may 
be attacks of profuse, watery , painless 
diarrhea. The appetite may be disturbed, 
causing either great hunger at night or a 
complete loss of appetite which, however, 
returns after the first mouthful of a meal.  
A bitter taste in the mouth may arise from an 
unsettled stomach. In addition, China  may be 
prescribed to treat digestive symptoms arising 
as a result of gastroenteritis and disorders of 
the gallbladder.KEY SYMPTOMS  exhaustion after fluid loss • great imagination  
• desire for alcohol and for sweet or spicy foods • oversensitivity
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to the tropical forests of South 
America, but now grown in southeast Asia, 
India, Sri Lanka, and East Africa.
BACKGROUND
In the 17th century, Jesuits used quinine, 
extracted from Peruvian bark, as a cure for 
malaria. It was widely adopted in Europe as 
a treatment for fevers.
PREPARATION
The bark is macerated in alcohol for at least 
ﬁve days, before being ﬁltered, diluted, and 
then succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Peruvian bark, cinchona bark, Jesuit’s bark, 
china bark, calisaya bark, loxa bark, red 
bark, yellow cinchona.
See also Chronic fatigue syndrome,  page 205MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Symptoms better  For warmth; with rest; for 
firm pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  At night; after eating; for sour 
foods; for drinking, especially excess tea.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Throbbing pain in the head, 
possibly linked to facial neuralgia, nosebleeds, 
tinnitus, or liver disorders.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for firm pressure 
on the painful area; for sleep.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for drafts; at night; 
in the fall; for light touch, such as combing  
the hair.The source of this remedy is Peruvian bark, which was taken from 
South America to Europe by Jesuits in the 17th century . This bark  
is of particular historical significance for homeopaths, since quinine 
extracted from it became the subject of Hahnemann’s first 
homeopathic proving. In 1790 he tested quinine on himself, and 
noticed that it caused symptoms similar to the malaria for which  
it was prescribed as a cure  (see page 15) . He developed the remedy 
China , which has become a key treatment for malarial symptoms 
and exhaustion due to fluid loss or long-term illness.PERUVIAN BARK  The bark  
of this tropical tree yields 
quinine, which causes 
symptoms similar to those  
of malaria if taken in  
large doses.DRIED BARK
FRESH 
BARK

50•
Coffea cruda syn. C. arabica
COFFEA
REMEDY PROFILE
Drinking too much coffee produces symptoms 
that are very similar to those treated by Coffea . 
Homeopaths often prescribe it for those with 
overactive minds and thoughts that race 
uncontrollably . This is generally accompanied 
by restlessness and nervousness.
Coffea  is also useful for those who 
experience overly excited or ecstatic states, 
perhaps precipitated by narcotics, a series of 
events, or a sudden shock, such as very good 
or very bad news. Such states can frequently 
trigger excessive exhilaration or despair, with 
an inability to calm down and insomnia or 
headaches. The nerves are taut, and the senses 
may be so acute that fresh air, noises, smells, 
and tastes seem unbearable. Hypersensitivity 
to pain, to the point where pain causes intense 
despair, is not unusual. Coffea  may also help 
insomnia, palpitations, overexcitement, and 
flushing during the menopause.
Insomnia
SYMPTOMS  Excess mental activity , making the 
mind race with thoughts and ideas. Sleep may 
be impossible for long periods, despite 
tiredness, due to a frustrating inability to 
switch off the mind. Any sleep obtained is 
interrupted by the slightest noise, since the nerves are stretched taut. 
Symptoms may often be 
due to pressure or stress 
involving work deadlines  
or exam revision.
Symptoms better  For warmth;  
for rest.
Symptoms worse  For cold, windy 
weather; for noise, odors, and touch.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  One-sided pain in the head,  
which feels as if a nail is being driven into it. 
Pain sets in upon waking, and can seem 
unbearable. It can extend to the ears and  
teeth  (see below) , with possible facial neuralgia. 
Common triggers are tension, stress, or an 
overactive mind.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses;  
for lying or sitting still in darkness.
Symptoms worse  For fresh air; for noise;  
for tea or coffee.
Toothaches
SYMPTOMS  Pain that shoots downward from 
the teeth to the tips of the fingers.
Symptoms better  For ice or cold water on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for menstruation; 
for hot foods.MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Ethiopia, but now grown in tropical 
areas worldwide. South America and African 
countries such as Kenya and Tanzania 
supply the bulk of the world’s crop.
BACKGROUND
Originally an African stimulant and drink that 
spread to Arabia and was used by Muslims 
to stay awake in all-night prayer. In England, 
the Church linked it with the devil.
PREPARATION
Ripe, unroasted coffee beans are 
macerated in alcohol for at least ﬁve days 
before being ﬁltered. The resulting liquid is 
then repeatedly diluted and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Coffee, Arabian coffee.
See also Toothaches,  page 232 ; Insomnia, page 244Native to Ethiopia, coffee was reportedly first drunk  
in the Middle East, introduced in Europe in the  
17th century , then taken by Europeans to the East  
and to South America. It has been incorporated into 
Ayurvedic medicine, which uses unripe beans  
to treat headaches and ripe, roasted beans for  
diarrhea. Coffee’s main active constituent, caffeine, has 
been used medicinally as an analgesic, a diuretic,  
a digestive tonic, and a stimulant to the nervous system. 
Modern medicine combines caffeine with conventional analgesics such as aspirin  
to make over-the-counter painkillers. However, coffee has long had a reputation  
for being simultaneously helpful and harmful: excessive consumption upsets the 
digestion, drains the body of calcium, and can cause nervousness. Dr. Stapf 
proved the homeopathic remedy in 1823.
COFFEE  Coffee’s stimulating 
effect is weakened if it is 
drunk repeatedly.
COFFEE BEANSRaw berries were 
originally chewed as 
a stimulant
Each berry 
contains two 
seeds (beans)KEY SYMPTOMS  overstimulation leading to sleep problems  
• oversensitivity to pain • restlessness and nervousness
BRANCH

•51
CONIUMConium maculatum
REMEDY PROFILE
Conium  is prescribed for people whose  
minds are dulled by illness, so that they  
seem mentally paralyzed, tired, and  
depressed, with “fixed” ideas and an  
aversion to company . These people tend  
to be very materialistic when young, but 
ultimately lose interest in possessions.
The remedy is prescribed for cysts  
or tumors in the reproductive organs.  
It is used if physical symptoms, such as 
gradual stiffening of the legs, “mirror”  
the mental paralysis. Conium  may help  
if illness is due to mental strain, grief,  
or old age. In the elderly , it is thought  
to restore vitality and counter premature 
aging. It is also used for giddiness,  
as well as for emotional and physical  
problems due to sexual excess or  
suppression of the sex drive.
Cysts, tumors & cancer
SYMPTOMS  Hard lumps in the prostate, 
testicles, breasts, ovaries, or uterus, with  
sharp local pain and a possible feeling  
of internal itchiness. Breast tumors may  
be accompanied by secondary lumps in  
the armpits.
Symptoms better  For local pressure;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For injury; for exertion;  
at night; for the pressure of tight clothing.
Swollen breasts
SYMPTOMS  Enlarged, tender, hard breasts  
prior to menstrual periods, with heaviness  
in the legs and a reduced sex drive.Symptoms better  For pressure on  
the breasts; for letting the arms  
hang down; for fasting; for  
expressing emotion.
Symptoms worse  For cold; 
for lying down; for turning 
over in bed; for movement.
Enlarged prostate
SYMPTOMS  A sensation of heaviness in the 
prostate and frequent interruption of urine 
flow, possibly with a discharge from the 
penis and impotency .
Symptoms better  For firm local pressure;  
for walking.
Symptoms worse  For injury; for exertion;  
for lying down; for tight clothing.
Nervous disorders
SYMPTOMS  Cold, trembly , weak legs, with 
giddiness and sensitivity to light. Weakness 
may eventually extend to the entire body . 
These symptoms are common in advancing age.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement; 
for letting the limbs hang down.
Symptoms worse  For injury; at night; for 
exertion; for jarring; for eating.
Sexual problems
SYMPTOMS  Extreme sexual excitement with 
premature ejaculation or impotence in men, 
and vaginal discharge and irregular menstruation 
in women. Suppression of sexual activity may 
cause anxiety , depression, and forgetfulness.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the genitals; 
for walking.
Symptoms worse  For sexual excess or celibacy; 
for alcohol.SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Common in hedges, damp meadows,  
along river banks, and on waste ground 
throughout much of Europe, Asia, and  
North America.
BACKGROUND
Used in ancient Rome for epilepsy, mania, 
chorea, swellings, and tumors. In 19th-
century Europe, hemlock was given as  
a painkiller.
PREPARATION
The fresh ﬂowering plant, including the root, 
is macerated in alcohol and then diluted  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Hemlock, spotted hemlock.
See also Breast problems,  page 201 ; Prostate problems,  page 202 ; Cancer,  page 208 ; Breast pain, page 258MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Generations of storytellers have woven the poison  
hemlock into their tales. The Greek physician Dioscorides 
and the Roman natural historian Pliny used it in the  
1st century CE to calm sexual urges, as a painkiller, and  
for skin complaints, nervous disorders, and breast tumors. 
Hahnemann proved and published the homeopathic remedy  
in his Chronic Diseases  (1821–34).
HEMLOCK  The toxins in this plant 
cause paralysis, primarily of the 
respiratory nerves, which leads 
to death by suffocation if taken 
in excess.Stem covered with 
purple spots is 
characteristic of 
hemlockKEY SYMPTOMS  materialistic nature with fixed ideas  
• complaints that are triggered by suppression of 
sexual feelings • tendency to develop tumors

52•
Cucumis colocynthis syn. Citrullus colocynthis
COLOCYNTHIS
REMEDY PROFILE
Colocynthis  works best on those whose 
symptoms are brought on by suppressed 
anger. These people tend to be generally 
restless, anxious, and reserved, but easily 
irritated or angered. They have a strong 
sense of right and wrong, and can feel 
humiliated if their opinion is contradicted; 
the humiliation then gives way to 
indignation. Colocynthis  is prescribed if  
the physical complaint, such as neuralgia  
or a digestive disorder, is brought on by,  
or exacerbated by, pent-up anger.
The remedy is used chiefly for acute pain, 
specifically colicky abdominal pain; 
cramping in the hips, kidneys, and ovaries; 
headaches; or shooting nerve pain in the 
face, neck, and limbs. It may also be 
prescribed for gout and rheumatic pain  
in the neck.
Colic & diarrhea
SYMPTOMS  Griping, twisting, spasmodic pains 
just below the navel. Often of sudden onset, 
the pain is generally linked to repressed anger, 
but may also have a physical cause, such as 
gallstones. Other symptoms include nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea with copious, thin, 
green or yellowish stools. The abdomen may 
feel bloated, and pressing on the site or 
passing gas may bring relief.
Colocynthis  may be prescribed for infantile 
colic if a baby screams, gets red in the face, 
and draws the legs up to the abdomen. The 
pain is usually most intense in the evening, 
lasting from a few minutes to several hours.Symptoms better  For warmth; for bending 
double; for passing gas or stools; for coffee.
Symptoms worse  For anger; before diarrhea or 
passing stools; for drinking; for eating, 
particularly fruits.
Facial neuralgia
SYMPTOMS  Searing pain on the right side of 
the face, maybe extending to the ear. The 
burning, lacerating pain often comes in acute 
waves. There may also be a headache with 
right-sided facial neuralgia.
Symptoms better  For firm pressure on the 
affected area; for sleep; for coffee.
Symptoms worse  For anger; for touch;  
for movement.
Menstrual problems
SYMPTOMS  Cramping pain in the uterus or 
ovaries during menstruation. Alternatively, 
menstrual periods may cease entirely 
following bouts of extreme anger.
Symptoms better  For heat; for the application 
of firm pressure to the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for anger; for 
emotional stress.
Neuralgic pains
SYMPTOMS  Sharp pains down the outer side 
(usually the right side) of the thigh, leg, and 
foot. These severe, tearing pains are often 
accompanied by a backache, followed by 
numbness and weakness in the limbs. Sciatica KEY SYMPTOMS   conditions that are triggered by pent-up anger • colicky pains that 
are relieved by pressure • indignation • neuralgic pains that are better for warmthMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Turkey, but can now be found 
growing in many hot, dry, sandy regions 
throughout the world.
BACKGROUND
Used in ancient Greece as a strong 
purgative and for complaints ranging from 
mania to lethargy, edema, and dropsy.
PREPARATION
The dried, deseeded fruit is powdered and 
macerated in alcohol, before being diluted 
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Colocynth, bitter apple, bitter cucumber.
See also Irritable bowel syndrome,  page 189 ; Ulcerative colitis,  page 190 ; Sciatica,  page 218 ; Gastroenteritis,  page 236 ; Colic,  page 246and sharp, cramping pain in the kidneys, hips, 
or pelvis may also be helped by this remedy .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for bending 
double; for lying on the painful side; for firm 
pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for drafts;  
for anger; for the slightest movement,  
even breathing deeply; for lying on the  
non-painful side.In the Old Testament, it is related that the prophet Elisha turned  
this bitter, toxic gourd into an edible fruit during famine, but 
colocynth was generally used as a drastic purgative, and 
also to induce abortion. Ingesting the pulp causes 
inflammation of the bowels and severe cramps.  
The homeopathic remedy , which was proved by 
Hahnemann in 1821, is used to treat these same 
symptoms, as well as colicky pains, neuralgia,  
and cramps in the pelvis.
COLOCYNTH  This gourd 
contains a substance  
called colocynthin, which 
causes severe cramps  
and gastrointestinal 
inflammation if ingested.Dried fruit resembles 
small pumpkin the 
size of an orangeSeeds are 
considered 
nutritious but 
are not used  
in homeopathy

•53
STRAMONIUMDatura stramonium
REMEDY PROFILE
People who respond best to Stramonium  
may experience rage and violence, 
particularly sudden outbursts accompanied 
by strong fears. The anger may be rooted in 
profound fear, following abuse or an 
accident. The fear may take the form of 
terror of the dark or of water. Those affected 
may also manifest hyperactive or overt 
sexuality. They are prone to stammering, 
and may have religious delusions, praying 
and proselytizing incessantly. Sleep may 
exacerbate symptoms.
Stramonium  is prescribed for fevers and 
chest complaints accompanied by the typical 
rages and terrors. It is also used, if the 
characteristic traits are evident, for delirium, 
tics, convulsions, Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy , 
and other nervous-system disorders.
The remedy is sometimes prescribed to treat 
chorea and for some serious psychological 
problems, such as mania, manic depression, 
and schizophrenia, particularly if they are 
accompanied by hallucinations or violence.
Fever
SYMPTOMS  High fever with a burning thirst. 
There may be night terrors, fear of the dark, 
hallucinations, delirium, or febrile 
convulsions. The limbs may twitch 
involuntarily , and the heart and pulse may  
be “in turmoil.”
Symptoms better  For warmth; for light;  
for company.
Symptoms worse  For cloudy weather; for sleep; 
for darkness; for being left alone; for looking at 
shiny, reflective surfaces; for swallowing.Violence & mania
SYMPTOMS  Excitability with disorientation, 
confusion, a tendency to violence, and fear  
of the dark. Writhing, bouts of garrulousness, 
and incoherent muttering are common, and 
there may be hallucinations, visions, and 
imaginary voices. Symptoms may be triggered 
by the trauma of childbirth, by alcoholism or 
drug addiction, or by more serious conditions 
such as schizophrenia.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for light;  
for company.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for darkness; for 
looking at shiny, reflective objects; for looking 
at dark water.
Chorea
SYMPTOMS  Involuntary, jerky, twitches  
of the face, limbs, or trunk, often with 
stuttering. Symptoms may be caused by 
extreme fright, a head injury, a bad reaction 
to vaccination, or meningitis. In extreme 
cases there may be facial grimacing, 
convulsions, or epilepsy.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for light;  
for company.
Symptoms worse  For windy weather; for touch; 
for looking at shiny, reflective objects; for 
looking at dark water.
Asthma
SYMPTOMS  Breathlessness, tightness in the 
chest, or a dry , wheezy cough. Attacks occur 
with, or after, fits of intense rage or fear.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for light;  
for company.
Symptoms worse  For darkness; in the morning; 
in the evening; for looking at dark water.KEY SYMPTOMS anger accompanied by fear  
• fear of the dark • fear of water  
• stammering • trembling and convulsions 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Thought to be native to both South America 
and western Asia, but now found growing in 
many temperate areas, often on wasteland.
BACKGROUND
Introduced to Europe in the 16th century, 
and traditionally used as a narcotic,  
a painkiller, an anti-inﬂammatory, and  
to treat convulsions.
PREPARATION
The fresh leaves and ﬂowers, or the  
seeds, are chopped and macerated in 
alcohol, before being ﬁltered, diluted,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Thorn apple, devil’s apple, stinkweed, false 
castor oil.
See also Irritable bowel syndrome,  page 189 ; Phobias,  page 211MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Bronchitis
SYMPTOMS  Wheezing that is associated with 
shortness of breath, or a cough that generates 
yellow or green phlegm. Strong fear or anger 
may trigger or exacerbate the symptoms.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for light;  
for company.
Symptoms worse  For darkness; in the morning; 
in the evening; for looking at dark water.A strong hallucinogen, thorn apple was used in the 
salves of medieval folk healers and in American Indian 
shamanistic rites. It relaxes the muscles of the bronchial 
tubes and digestive and urinary tracts, and reduces mucus 
secretions. Stramonium , proved by Hahnemann and 
published in his Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34), is used  
for violent brain activity , often due to nervous disorders.
THORN APPLE  The 
alkaloids in thorn apple 
are poisonous and even 
deadly if taken in 
sufficient dosage.FLOWERING 
STEMFunnel-shaped white 
or violet flowers 
appear in summer
SEEDSSeeds are 
contained in spiny 
fruit capsulesLeaves can be  
burned and inhaled  
to relieve asthma

54•
Delphinium staphisagria
STAPHYSAGRIA
REMEDY PROFILE
Staphysagria  is most appropriate for people who 
bottle up their emotions, especially rage. They 
tend to be extremely sensitive, particularly to 
criticism or rudeness. Irritation and anger can 
bubble away inside them, although they appear 
mild-natured and yielding on the surface, 
avoiding confrontation. When their emotions 
finally erupt, they often overreact and tremble  
with anger. There may be a history of abuse.
Common physical symptoms include 
perspiration, gas, and stools that smell of rotten 
eggs. Cravings for alcohol and sweet foods are 
typical. Suppressing emotions may cause 
headaches, depression, or an increased sex drive. 
Despite shyness, the libido is often high and 
there is a tendency to masturbate.
Staphysagria  is generally most commonly 
prescribed for cystitis and other urogenital 
disorders, and for joint pains and neuralgia, 
skin conditions, insomnia, and toothaches.
Urogenital problems
SYMPTOMS  Cystitis in either sex after sexual 
intercourse, especially on the first occasion, or 
on the first occasion with a new partner. In men 
there may be urine retention, linked to an 
enlarged prostate, and the testicles may wither 
or develop lumps. There may also be other 
urinary problems, such as urethritis, bed-
wetting, and symptoms that develop following 
urogenital surgery and catheterization.
Symptoms better  For warmth; after meals.
Symptoms worse  For the slightest touch or 
pressure; for suppressing emotions.
Joint pain
SYMPTOMS  Bruised, sore, weak, or immobile 
limbs. The right shoulder may be painful, and there may be neuralgia. Joints may have  
bony nodules.
Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for movement.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Easily infected, unhealthy-looking 
skin that is slow to heal if cut. Stinging 
pains persist in slow-healing wounds or 
scars. The remedy may help speed wound-
healing after surgery, particularly if the 
temperament matches the remedy profile. 
There may be skin eruptions such as eczema 
and psoriasis with dry, thick crusts and 
itching, or weepy, scaly skin that burns 
before and after being scratched. After being 
scratched, an itch may occur elsewhere on 
the body.
Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for suppressing 
emotions.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Compressing pain as though a 
weight is boring through the forehead, or a 
numb sensation in the head, with dizzy spells 
that intensify on sitting or lying down.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for yawning.
Symptoms worse  For mental exertion; in the 
early morning; for anger.
Insomnia
SYMPTOMS  Exhaustion and frequent yawning. 
Despite the fatigue, there is difficulty in falling 
into a deep sleep, and even after sleeping 
there may be bad temper, irritability , and 
continued exhaustion.
Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  For an afternoon nap; for 
emotional stress; for sexual excess.KEY SYMPTOMS  conditions generated as side-effects of surgery, particularly urogenital 
surgery • suppressed emotions • increased sex drive and masturbationMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Europe and now grown in Asia and 
southern Europe. Prefers chalky, loamy soil 
in areas of waste ground and cornﬁelds.
BACKGROUND
In Western herbal medicine the seeds of the 
plant can be used to make an ointment for 
treating head lice and other parasites.
PREPARATION
The seeds of the plant are gathered once it 
has ﬁnished ﬂowering. They are then dried, 
triturated, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Stavesacre, palmated larkspur, housewort.
See also Palpitations,  page 186 ; Psoriasis,  page 195 ; Infertility,  page 203 ; Grief,  page 213 ; Styes,  page 220 ; Cystitis,  page 260Toothaches
SYMPTOMS  Decay associated with black, loose 
teeth, causing pain in the affected area that is 
worse for being touched.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For biting and chewing; for 
touching the affected area; for menstruation.As long ago as the 5th century BCE, ancient Greek physicians were using this  
plant to purge the bowels and to induce vomiting. Applied externally , it was  
given as an antidote to stings and bites. Its common name, stavesacre, 
comes from the ancient Greek staphis , “raisin,” and agria , “wild.” The  
plant’s seeds are a powerful poison. The homeopathic remedy , proved 
by Hahnemann in 1819, is typically used to treat people who tend to 
suppress their emotions, especially anger.
STAVESACRE  This plant has been used  
herbally for centuries as an emetic and a  
treatment for head lice, warts, and itching.FLOWERING 
STEMDelicate, pale-blue  
or purple flowers  
appear in summer
SEEDS

•55
HELLEBORUSHelleborus niger
REMEDY PROFILE
The people who benefit most from taking  
this remedy are characteristically dull and 
sluggish. It is best suited to those who feel 
stupefied and have slow mental processes. 
They commonly experience anguish, 
irritability , apathy , and depression. These 
people frequently feel as though their brains 
are in turmoil, and do not understand what is 
going on around them. Although they may 
beg for help, they are generally inconsolable.
Physical symptoms generally worsen 
between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m., and improve in 
warmth and when lying covered up.
Helleborus  is prescribed for mental states 
that feature sluggishness and stupefaction. 
Acute inflammatory nervous conditions may 
be helped, as may headaches, digestive 
problems, and depression. Symptoms may 
follow as a result of concussion, surgery to the 
brain, or a bout of meningitis or encephalitis.
Nervous-system disorders
SYMPTOMS  Stupefaction and dullness, possibly 
even giving an impression of stupidity or 
mental disorder. Questions are answered 
slowly and with great effort. The body feels 
numb and the brain loses control over the 
muscles, so that objects drop easily from the 
hands. Forgetfulness and poor concentration, 
with the memory becoming totally blank, are 
common. In extreme cases symptoms may be 
associated with Alzheimer’s disease, including 
memory loss, anxiety , and disorientation.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for being 
wrapped up; for lying quietly at rest and 
undisturbed.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for being 
uncovered; for exertion; during the night; 
between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.Brain inflammation
SYMPTOMS  Swelling of the brain tissue, 
possibly caused by encephalitis or meningitis. 
Symptoms typically include convulsions, and 
the head tends to feel very hot while the body 
feels very cold. There is a feeling of stupor 
and sluggishness.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for being 
wrapped up; for lying quietly at rest and 
undisturbed.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for being 
uncovered; for exertion; during the night; 
between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  A headache or migraine with 
mental dullness, possibly after injury or 
surgery . The headache often begins in the 
back of the head or in the neck, and there 
may be a need to pull the head down toward 
the body . Dizziness and vertigo causing 
vomiting may accompany the pain.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For being uncovered; for 
exertion; for stooping; between 4 p.m. and  
8 p.m.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Painful bowel urges with watery 
diarrhea and mucus. Bowel movements are so 
disoriented and sluggish that constipation may 
also occur. There is often a lack of thirst and a 
dry mouth.
Symptoms better  For warmth and warm 
coverings; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for being uncovered; 
at night; between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
Depression
SYMPTOMS  Blank stares, involuntary sighs, 
and dark moods, especially between  KEY SYMPTOMS mental dullness and sluggishness • chilliness • tendency to  
drop things • person feels worse between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Grows naturally on rocky or mountainous 
sites in southern Europe. Flowers from 
winter to spring and is widely cultivated as  
a popular garden plant.
BACKGROUND
Used in the past by herbalists as a treatment 
for lice, and as a local anesthetic, purgative, 
heart tonic, and means of inducing an 
abortion. The leaves were used as a heart 
stimulant for the elderly.
PREPARATION
The tincture is prepared from the fresh  
root of the plant. This is dug up in the 
winter, chopped, and macerated, then 
ﬁltered and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Black hellebore, Christmas rose.
See also Depression,  page 212 ; Headache & migraine,  page 218 ; Digestion,  page 234 ; Irritability,  page 244MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
4 p.m. and 8 p.m. The lips and clothes  
may be picked at.
Symptoms better  For being wrapped up warmly.
Symptoms worse  During the night; for exertion.As early as 1400 BCE, the Roman natural historian Pliny wrote of using black 
hellebore for mental conditions. Ancient Greek and Roman philosophers would 
drink an infusion of the plant to increase their concentration before prolonged 
debates. The herb is extremely toxic and is now used only in homeopathy , since 
herbalists believe that it is too strong to be used safely . Helleborus  was proved by 
Hahnemann and published in his Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34).
BLACK HELLEBORE  
This plant is poisonous 
if ingested in all but 
the smallest doses. It 
was used in medieval 
medicine to expel an 
excess of “black bile,” 
a bodily “humor” (see 
page 12)  linked with 
insanity.

56•
Hyoscyamus niger
HYOSCYAMUS
REMEDY PROFILE
Hyoscyamus  is the best remedy for those with 
paranoid traits and behavioral problems. The 
typical Hyoscyamus  pattern is incoherent, 
excited behavior, muttering, and obscene 
sexual exhibitionism. Laughter at 
inappropriate times is common, as is a sense 
of being ostracized in a private world.
In addition, Hyoscyamus  is used for physical 
conditions associated with involuntary 
twitching, such as delirium, and for fits of dry 
coughing. Homeopaths may prescribe it for 
certain types of convulsions, such as petit mal, 
epilepsy , and, in children, febrile convulsions 
with a rapid rise in temperature. In some 
cases, the remedy may be given for 
schizophrenia and Parkinson’s disease, if 
accompanied by marked withdrawal, 
obscenity , and inappropriate laughter.
Behavioral problems
SYMPTOMS  Violent outbursts and a desire to 
shock, with behavior ranging from simple 
foolishness to shameless sexual 
exhibitionism. Characteristic impulses are  
to appear naked, masturbate, and handle 
the genitals. Lewdness, promiscuity, or an 
erotic obsession may develop. Jealousy is 
common, and in children is often due to a 
new baby in the family.
Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  For fright; for emotional 
stress or trauma.
Delirium
SYMPTOMS  T witching, starts, and facial 
grimaces, with the typical Hyoscyamus  
mental state  (see above) . Mania is possible, triggered by fever, addiction, brain injury,  
or the trauma of childbirth. Despite a 
meager flow, there may be a frequent  
desire to urinate. Constant fumbling with 
the hands or clothing is common. There 
may be convulsions, possibly with 
involuntary urination.
Symptoms better  For sitting up; for walking 
around; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for lying down; for 
emotional stress or trauma.
Paranoia
SYMPTOMS  Severe paranoia and jealousy , with 
intense suspicion of being watched, deceived, 
or even poisoned.
Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  Around the time of 
menstruation; for emotional stress or trauma.
Cough
SYMPTOMS  Dry , spasmodic, tickly cough. 
Suffocating fits of coughing trigger spasms 
severe enough to cause doubling over and 
coughing up of blood.
Symptoms better  For sitting up.
Symptoms worse  For lying down.KEY SYMPTOMS behavioral problems with erotic tendencies • delirium  
and paranoia • spasmodic cough • laughter at inappropriate timesMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
See also Stroke,  page 187Henbane was advocated by the Greek physician Dioscorides in the 1st century  
CE as a painkiller and soporific. The Latin name comes from the Greek hys,  
“pig,” and kyamos , “bean”—perhaps because pigs are not poisoned by eating it, 
while humans are. It was the method by which Shakespeare had Hamlet’s  
father murdered, and the famous Dr. Crippen used henbane to  
murder his wife. Hyoscyamus , proved by Hahnemann in 1805,  
is used for emotional disorders and coughs.
HENBANE  The antispasmodic properties of this plant 
are used by herbalists to relieve tremors and rigidity 
during the early stages of Parkinson’s disease.Leaves may cause 
skin irritation on 
contactLeaves are high  
in the sedative 
alkaloid hyoscine, 
used to make a 
conventional 
preoperative 
anesthetic
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to southern Europe and western Asia, 
and now found throughout much of Europe 
and America.
BACKGROUND
Used in herbalism as a painkiller and 
sedative for urinary tract pain and nervous 
spasms. Herbalists also massage in  
the oil externally for nerve pain and 
rheumatoid arthritis.
PREPARATION
The whole fresh plant in ﬂower, including  
 the root, is chopped ﬁnely and steeped in 
alcohol for ten days. It is then diluted and 
succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Henbane, common henbane, black henbane, 
hairy henbane, stinking nightshade, stinking 
Roger, hog’s bean, cassilata.

•57
IGNATIAIgnatia amara syn. Strychnos ignatia
REMEDY PROFILE
Ignatia  is best suited to people, especially 
women, who are experiencing strong 
emotional problems, such as a broken 
relationship or acute grief after a death. 
They are frequently emotionally fragile, 
artistic, and hypersensitive. Prone to mood 
swings and feelings of self-pity, they may 
have a rather brittle air, often laughing and 
crying at the same time. Suppressing their 
emotions can lead to hysteria. High 
expectations of those close to them are 
typical, and they find it hard to break the 
bond with their partner if disillusioned  
in love.
Contradictory physical symptoms are 
typically treated with Ignatia , such as 
indigestion that is relieved by eating, or a 
sore throat that is better for swallowing 
solid food. There is often great sensitivity to 
pain, with a tendency to yawn and sigh 
frequently. There is also a dislike of crowds, 
and a fear of birds, especially chickens.
Ignatia  is used to treat illness that develops 
from emotional stress. Such conditions 
include headaches, nervous tics and twitches, 
digestive disorders such as nausea and 
vomiting, and a sore throat.
Grief & distress
SYMPTOMS  Fainting, crying and laughing 
simultaneously , or hysterical behavior due to 
an inability to express emotions. There may 
also be insomnia.
Symptoms better  For breathing deeply;  
for eating.
Symptoms worse  For anxiety; for emotional 
stress; for coffee; for tobacco.Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Sharp, spasmodic pain, as if a nail 
is sticking into the side of the head, with a 
hot, heavy sensation in the head and possible 
dizziness, especially after emotional stress.
Symptoms better  For lying on the affected 
side; for resting the head on a surface.
Symptoms worse  For loud talking; for stooping; 
for being in a smoky room.
Nervous disorders
SYMPTOMS  T witches, nervous tics, or numbness 
in the face or limbs, possibly escalating to 
hysterical paralysis, convulsions, or chorea 
(random, jerky twitches of the face or limbs). 
Ignatia  is used if symptoms are triggered by 
shock, grief  (see left) , or other strong 
emotions.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for changing 
position; for firm pressure on the affected area; 
after eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for touch; for 
emotional stress; for strong smells.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Nausea and vomiting that is 
alleviated by eating, typically with burping, 
hiccuping, and profuse, bitter-tasting saliva in 
the mouth. There may be hunger unsated by 
eating. A prolapsed rectum with sharp, 
upward-shooting pain may be helped by 
Ignatia , as may diarrhea, constipation, or 
hemorrhoids that have been triggered by 
emotional stress.
Symptoms better  For lying or pressing on the 
affected area; for changing position; for 
urinating; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for touch; for 
strong smells; for coffee; for tobacco.KEY SYMPTOMS  ailments triggered by grief • tendency to bottle up 
emotions • fear of birds • sensation as if there is a lump in the throat
See also Grief,  page 213 ; Hiccups,  page 234 ; Insomnia,  page 244 ; Absent periods,  page 256MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Sore throat
SYMPTOMS  A constantly sore, tickly throat that 
feels as if there is a lump in it, yet seems 
better for eating solids. There may also be a 
racking cough.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for changing 
position; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for cold air; for 
emotional stress; for coffee; for tobacco.St. Ignatius’s bean seeds were traditionally worn by natives of 
the Philippine Islands as amulets to prevent and cure all 
manner of diseases. The Spanish Jesuits introduced the seeds 
into Europe from East Asia in the 17th century . They contain 
strychnine, a powerful poison that acts on the nervous system 
when ingested. The homeopathic remedy Ignatia  was proved and 
published by Hahnemann in his Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34).
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to the East Indies, China, and the 
Philippine Islands. This large tree bears a bitter 
fruit that contains the seeds within its pulp.
BACKGROUND
In the late 17th century, the Dutch used  
the seeds of St. Ignatius’s bean to treat 
conditions such as gout, cholera, asthma, 
and epilepsy.
PREPARATION
The dried seeds are powdered before being 
steeped in alcohol at least ﬁve days.  
This is followed by ﬁltration, dilution,  
and succussion.
COMMON NAME
St. Ignatius’s bean.ST. IGNATIUS’S BEAN The seeds are very bitter, 
due to the poisonous strychnine they contain.Pebblelike, heavy seed pods are 
embedded in bitter pulp of fruit

58•
Lilium lancifolium syn. L. tigrinum
LILIUM
REMEDY PROFILE
Lilium  is traditionally linked with people who 
are hurried and impatient, and generally 
trying to do too many things at once. They 
often feel wild and out of control, and may 
even fear that they are going insane. They like 
to be the center of attention and can be quick 
to anger if they are not. Alternatively , they 
may be filled with feelings of remorse, 
especially of a religious nature, and torment 
themselves endlessly about their behavior.
A conflict between very high moral standards 
and intense sexual urges is characteristic in these 
people. The suppression of their sexual desire 
generally aggravates frustration and anger. They 
are often sensitive to criticism, easily offended, 
irritated, even by kindness, and hurried beyond 
reason. People who respond well to this remedy 
typically have a burning sensation in their 
hands, and prefer cool weather.
Lilium  is prescribed chiefly for female 
reproductive-system disorders. It is also  
given for states of despair and depression,  
and for urinary complaints, angina,  
and poor circulation.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Disorders of the female reproductive 
organs, such as uterine prolapse, vulval 
itching, and a bearing-down pain in the 
pelvis. In addition, the ovaries may be swollen 
and menstruation is often painful. Fibroids 
may also be treated with the remedy .
Symptoms better  For cool, fresh air; for lying 
on the left side.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; at night; for 
jarring; after a miscarriage.Depression
SYMPTOMS  A sense of despair and need for 
religious salvation is characteristic in people who 
need Lilium . They are easily offended and feel 
that people are deliberately annoying them. 
They may have a fear of developing an incurable 
disease and look for a reason to grieve.
Symptoms better  For being occupied;  
for company.
Symptoms worse  For sympathy; after a 
miscarriage or menstruation.
Urinary disorders
SYMPTOMS  Cystitis with burning, stinging pain 
during and after urination. There is often  
a constant urge to pass urine, although  
only a small amount is passed at a time. 
Irritation in the genital area is experienced 
during both day and night. The symptoms 
usually affect women.
Symptoms better  For cool, fresh air; for lying 
on the left side.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; at night; for 
jarring; after a miscarriage.
Heart disorders
SYMPTOMS  Angina with numbness in the right 
arm and pain in the heart, as if it is being 
gripped. The heart may feel as if it is going to 
burst, as though it is hanging by a thread, or 
as though it is being alternately grasped and 
released. A rapid or irregular pulse is KEY SYMPTOMS hurry and impatience • intense sexual urges • preference  
for cool, fresh air • sensation as though the heart is being grippedMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to China and Japan, but now grown 
worldwide, almost always for ornamental 
purposes. Prefers moist, acidic soil in full 
sun, but with its base in shade.
BACKGROUND
Introduced to Europe and the Western world 
from China and Japan, and has since 
become a popular ornamental ﬂower for 
cultivation in gardens.
PREPARATION
The stalk, leaves, and ﬂowers of the fresh 
plant are ﬁnely chopped and soaked in 
alcohol for at least ten days. The mixture  
is then ﬁltered, diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Tiger lily.
See also Angina,  page 185common. Palpitations may occur, especially 
during pregnancy .
Symptoms better  For cool, fresh air; for lying 
on the left side; for rubbing or pressing the 
area around the heart.
Symptoms worse  For lying down at night.The Lilium  genus comprises around 100 species of bulbous 
plant, including the tiger lily. This was introduced to the  
West from China, Korea, and Japan, where it was cultivated  
as a food plant for centuries. The tiger lily has not generally 
been adopted into the Western herbal repertory, but forms  
the basis of an important homeopathic remedy for  
uterine pain and emotional problems. Lilium  was  
proved in 1867 by Dr. E. W . Payne of Maine.
TIGER LILY  The bright-orange flowers of this 
lily appear in late summer and early fall.Bright petals curl up to 
reveal distinctive spots

•59
LYCOPODIUMLycopodium clavatum
REMEDY PROFILE
Lycopodium  is prescribed when anticipatory 
anxiety features strongly in the psychological 
symptoms. Lack of confidence is often hidden 
by a veneer of arrogance or sarcasm. There is 
a dislike of close company , but also of being 
left alone.
Physical symptoms usually focus on 
digestive problems, with excessive bloating 
and gas. Complaints are often right-sided,  
or move from the right to the left of the body . 
Another typical physical trait, poor physical 
stamina, is often worse in the afternoons. 
Desire for sweet foods is common. Lycopodium  
is also used for kidney and prostate problems, 
headaches, and chest infections.
Anxiety
SYMPTOMS  Fear of inferiority and of failing, 
despite an air of quiet self-possession. Such 
fears may lead to exaggeration of the truth 
to bolster self-esteem. Insomnia, talking and 
laughing while asleep, and night fears are 
typical, as is apprehension on waking. 
Anticipatory anxiety, such as fear of public 
speaking, exams, or stage fright, often  
leads to digestive disorders  (see right) . Low 
self-esteem may result from poor memory  
or dyslexia. An aversion to change is often 
due to the challenges it brings. The 
demands of emotional commitment may be 
avoided, possibly resulting in sexual 
problems such as promiscuity, frigidity,  
or erectile dysfunction.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for being active; 
for gentle exercise in fresh air; for warm foods 
and drinks.Symptoms worse  For extreme heat or cold; for 
stuffy rooms; for being inactive; between  
4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion caused by anticipatory 
anxiety  (see left) , eating late at night, or eating 
foods that can cause gas, such as onions, 
cabbage, and beans. There may be a rumbling, 
bloated abdomen due to acrid, sour gas, 
insatiable hunger with discomfort after eating 
even small amounts of food, nausea, vomiting, 
constipation, and bleeding hemorrhoids.
Symptoms better  For cool air; at night; for 
loose clothes; for movement; for warm foods 
and drinks.
Symptoms worse  For tight clothes; between  
4 a.m. and 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.; for 
overeating; for cold foods and drinks.
Urogenital problems
SYMPTOMS  Urine with a sandy sediment due to 
kidney stones, or genital herpes. An enlarged 
prostate in men may be helped by the remedy .
Symptoms better  At night; for cool, fresh air; 
for being active; for warm foods and drinks.
Symptoms worse  For heat; between 4 p.m.  
and 8 p.m.
Chest infections
SYMPTOMS  Dry , sore, tickling cough, burning 
chest pain, and fast, labored breathing, which 
may be worse when lying on the back. The KEY SYMPTOMS anticipatory anxiety • lack of self-esteem • flatulence and constipation  
• desire for sweet foods • person feels worse between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to temperate areas throughout the 
Northern Hemisphere, and commonly found 
growing on moorland and in mountainous 
areas and forests.
BACKGROUND
Traditionally used for antibacterial and 
sedative action, it has also been given by 
herbalists as a digestive, a diuretic, to treat 
kidney stones, and to lower fever.
PREPARATION
The spikes are cut in summer and their 
spores are collected. These are then 
steeped in alcohol for at least ﬁve  
days, before being ﬁltered, diluted,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Club moss, wolf’s claw, stag’s-horn moss, 
running pine, lamb’s tail, fox tail, witch 
meal, vegetable sulfur.
See also Prostate problems,  page 202 ; Bloating & flatulence,  page 236 ; Erectile dysfunction,  page 264MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
throat is swollen and sore, notably on the 
right side. Thick, yellow catarrh may cause 
severe congestion.
Symptoms better  For loose clothes; for cool 
air; at night; for warm foods and drinks.
Symptoms worse  For stuffy rooms; for tight 
clothes; between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.; for fasting 
or overeating; for cold drinks.This plant’s root was said to bear a resemblance to a wolf’s foot, hence  
its folk name “wolf’s claw,” and Latin name, from the Greek lykos ,  
or “wolf” and podos , or “foot.” The plant has been used medicinally 
since the Middle Ages. Since the 17th century, the spores alone 
were given for gout and urine retention. Modern herbalists use 
the spores externally for wounds and eczema. Proved 
by Hahnemann in 1828, the remedy is used for 
digestive disorders and anxiety.CLUB MOSS  This plant  
has water-repellent spores 
that are used to stop pills 
from sticking together.Scaly spikes shoot up in 
summer, developing  
tips of yellow  
spore cases
SPORESSPRIG
Straggly stem is 
covered with 
shiny, scaly leaves

60•
Papaver somniferum
OPIUM
REMEDY PROFILE
Opium  is given to people who exhibit either or 
both of two opposite states. One is stupor, 
apathy , and dulled sensitivity to pain. The 
other is hyperactivity and intense sensitivity , 
often with insomnia.
If symptoms occur with one or both of these 
states, Opium  is given for insomnia, sleeping 
disorders, respiratory problems, constipation, 
and shock. It can also be used to help treat 
recovery from stroke paralysis, brain injuries, 
delirium tremens, and alcohol withdrawal.
Insomnia & narcolepsy
SYMPTOMS  Insomnia, inability to sleep despite 
fatigue, or brief bouts of irresistible drowsiness. 
Sleep is either light, restless, and easily 
disturbed, with hearing so acute that it seems  
to detect even the faint sounds of insects’ 
movements, or very heavy , with difficulty in 
waking. Sleep may be so deep that breathing 
becomes irregular or even stops momentarily . 
There may be talking during sleep.
Symptoms better  For a cool environment;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for sleep;  
for shock.
Constipation
SYMPTOMS  Constipation with no urge to pass 
stools for an extended length of time, which 
may result in fecal impaction. The digestion is 
sluggish and weak, and there is no appetite. 
Stools tend to retreat into the rectum, and are 
dark, small, and very hard, like black balls. 
During the day there may be drowsiness. 
Diarrhea may alternate with constipation, 
notably after shock  (see right) . Newborn babies 
may be given Opium  for constipation after the 
shock of childbirth.Symptoms better  For activity.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for sleep;  
for shock.
Shock & injury
SYMPTOMS  Either emotional and sensory 
shutdown, or overexcitement and 
hypersensitivity . Sluggishness and indifference 
may be evident, with dulled sensitivity to pain. 
Conversely , the person can be overwrought, 
possibly with insomnia  (see left)  or even 
convulsions. Either or both of these states may 
occur in response to shock, grief, or injury .
Symptoms better  For a cool environment;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; during and  
after sleep.
Post-stroke paralysis
SYMPTOMS  Paralysis of the limbs with dullness 
and stupor resembling that experienced after 
shock  (see above) . There may be blackouts,  
a blue-tinged face, and labored breathing.
Symptoms better  For a cool environment;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; during and  
after sleep.
Delirium tremens
SYMPTOMS  Extreme apathy or hypersensitivity , 
tremors, or even convulsions. There can be KEY SYMPTOMS stupor • apathy • dulled sensitivity to pain  
• hyperactivity with difficulty in sleepingMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to western Asia, and introduced to 
southeast Europe 3,000 years ago. Now 
grown mostly in India, Iran, China,  
and Australia.
BACKGROUND
Dedicated by the ancient Greeks and 
Romans to the gods of night, dreams, and 
death. Opium has been used since antiquity 
as a sedative and analgesic, and has also 
been used illicitly for many centuries as a 
recreational drug.
PREPARATION
Sticky latex (sap) from the unripe, green 
seed pods is dried, dissolved in alcohol,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Opium poppy, big smoke.
See also Stroke,  page 187 ; Grief,  page 213frightening visions, and possibly blackouts 
after alcohol binges.
Symptoms better  For a cool environment;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for sleep;  
for alcohol.A plant of extremes, this poppy is the source of both morphine, one of the  
strongest painkillers, and heroin, one of the most addictive substances known.  
It has played a dramatic role in history , prompting wars and huge social problems. 
Opium and heroin, derived illicitly , have produced devastating drug problems,  
while morphine and codeine are produced legally to play a vital role in conventional 
medicine. The homeopathic remedy was proved in 1805 by Hahnemann.
OPIUM POPPY  This plant 
produces seed pods that, 
when unripe, contain a white 
latex. Harvesting opium 
involves cutting open the 
seed pods in summer, 
collecting the latex that  
they exude, and drying it.SEED PODSFLOWERING 
STEMSeed pods contain 
latex used to  
make opiumFlowers appear in late 
summer and early fall

•61
PULSATILLAPulsatilla pratensis subsp . nigricans
REMEDY PROFILE
People who respond best to Pulsatilla  are 
sweet-natured, gentle, and compliant. They 
will avoid confrontation, but their moods 
change frequently and rapidly , and they can 
be stubborn in their demands for attention 
and sympathy . Their physical symptoms can 
be equally changeable. Easily moved to 
laughter or tears, they are highly prone to 
weepiness when ill, but are soon consoled by 
hugs. Other common traits are a dislike of 
stuffy rooms or fatty foods, a lack of thirst, 
and a preference for fresh air.
Pulsatilla  is given for labor, menstruation, 
menopause, and pregnancy problems. It is 
used for respiratory illness marked by 
yellowy-green catarrh, eye complaints, and 
indigestion with variable symptoms.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Short, variable, late, or absent 
menstrual flow with severe pain. There may 
be delayed onset of menstruation in puberty. 
Severe premenstrual syndrome may respond 
to the remedy, particularly if it is 
accompanied by indigestion, weepiness, and 
mood swings. In pregnancy, if the general 
symptom picture fits, Pulsatilla  is given for 
stress incontinence, fatigue, indigestion, and 
morning sickness (especially if this is 
brought on by fatty foods). It may also act 
on the uterine muscles to help turn a 
malpresented or breech baby in the uterus 
during labor.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for gentle 
exercise; for crying; for sympathy.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for lying on the left 
side; in the evening; for rich, fatty foods.Colds & coughs
SYMPTOMS  An alternately runny or blocked 
nose, with smelly , thick, yellowy-green 
catarrh, and a reduced sense of taste and 
smell. There may be wet, spasmodic 
coughing, with yellowy-green mucus and 
shortness of breath, which is worse for lying 
on the left side. Violent coughing fits tend to 
occur in the evening and at night; they may 
be triggered by lying down, and frequently 
cause sleep to be disturbed. Pulsatilla  may be 
prescribed for influenza when there is fever 
with alternate hot and cold flashes, a lack of 
thirst, and possibly an earache.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for gentle 
exercise; for crying; for sympathy.
Symptoms worse  For stuffy environments;  
for lying down.
Sinusitis
SYMPTOMS  Yellowy catarrh, weepiness, and 
headaches. The sinuses are tender to the 
touch. Sharp pains may begin on the right 
side of the face, but tend to move around.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for gentle 
exercise.
Symptoms worse  For stuffy environments;  
for cold; in the evening.
Eye infections
SYMPTOMS  Profuse, yellowy-green, foul-
smelling discharge from the eye, with 
sensitivity to light and possible indigestion  
(see right) . Pulsatilla  may help conjunctivitis 
and itchy styes.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for bathing  
the eyes in cold water.
Symptoms worse  For warm rooms; in  
the evening.KEY SYMPTOMS  weepiness • conditions that improve for sympathy • desire  
for open air • thick, yellowy-green catarrh • changeable mood
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Scandinavia, Denmark, Germany, 
and Russia, and now found across northern 
and central Europe.
BACKGROUND
Prescribed by the Greek physician 
Dioscorides in the 1st century CE for eye 
problems, and in 18th-century Europe for 
cataracts, ulcers, and tooth decay.
PREPARATION
The fresh, ﬂowering plant, including the root, 
is chopped and macerated in alcohol, before 
being diluted and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Small pasque ﬂower, meadow anemone, 
wind ﬂower.
See also Respiration,  pages 180 , 224; Digestion,  pages 189 , 234; Styes,  page 220 ; Women’s health,  page 256MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Variable, including indigestion, 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and painful, 
itchy hemorrhoids. No two stools are alike. 
The mouth is dry but there is no thirst and 
a craving for, or aversion to, rich foods that 
exacerbate the symptoms.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for  
gentle exercise.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for lying on the left 
side; in the evening; for rich, fatty foods.Small pasque flower has been used medicinally since the age of classical 
Greece. The name derives from the archaic term for Easter, Pasch , since the 
plant flowers around the time that the festival occurs. Roman legend says that 
this plant sprang from the tears of the goddess Venus, and was thus used to 
treat weepiness. Pulsatilla  was proved by Hahnemann in 1805, and is used for 
a variety of disorders, ranging from colds and coughs to digestive and 
gynecological conditions.SMALL PASQUE FLOWER
The smaller, darker  
flowers of this plant 
distinguish it from  
Pulsatilla vulgaris ,  
which is more  
commonly used  
in herbal medicine.WHOLE PLANTFLOWER-
HEAD

62•
Solanum dulcamara
DULCAMARA
REMEDY PROFILE
Dulcamara  is typically given to people who are 
sensitive to cold and damp, with symptoms 
caused by rapid temperature changes or cold, 
wet weather.
In the symptom picture for Dulcamara , 
these physical factors outweigh psychological 
traits, but some confusion, irritability , 
impatience, and restlessness may be evident, 
possibly with a domineering attitude, notably 
toward family members.
Susceptibility to respiratory infections 
causing thick, yellow mucus is typical. Hay 
fever and other allergic reactions are also 
common, as are head and joint pain, eczema, 
and diarrhea.
Colds & coughs
SYMPTOMS  Sore throat, with a thick, yellow 
discharge from the nose and the eyes. Thick 
mucus may be due to sinusitis, as may 
painful pressure and congestion in the head. 
A stiff neck is common, perhaps with back 
and limb pain. There may also be 
conjunctivitis, a rattling cough, bronchitis, 
or even pneumonia.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for dry, settled 
weather; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
at night.
Hay fever & asthma
SYMPTOMS  Nasal congestion, with profuse, 
watery discharge from the eyes and 
constricted breathing. Exposure to animal  
fur, grass pollen, dust mites, and other allergens may aggravate the severity  
of symptoms.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for dry, 
settled weather; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
at night.
Head & facial pain
SYMPTOMS  Pain in a specific part of the head, 
or with a sensation of heaviness, nausea, or 
confusion. Neuralgic face pain, perhaps 
caused by Bell’s palsy , may be treated, or  
pain due to sinusitis  (see left) .
Symptoms better  For dry, fine weather;  
for keeping still; for expelling catarrh.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
in winter.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Thickened, crusty, itchy skin, 
notably on the scalp, which bleeds when 
scratched. Dulcamara  is also used to treat 
urticaria (hives) brought on by sweating in 
humid conditions; large, flat, smooth warts, 
especially on the palms of the hands;  
and ringworm, often found on the scalps  
of children.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather; 
before menstruation.
Diarrhea
SYMPTOMS  Slimy , yellow or green stools, 
maybe with traces of blood. There may be 
nausea, and pain before passing stools.  
In children, symptoms may be triggered 
during teething.KEY SYMPTOMS  conditions that are affected by weather changes from  
hot to cold • domineering nature • sensitivity to cold and damp  
• asthma • urticaria in humid conditionsMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to north Africa, Europe, and northern 
Asia, and naturalized in North America. 
Grows in moist, shady soil.
BACKGROUND
Has a long history of use as an anti-
inﬂammatory and a liver tonic. Stem extracts 
have been used for warts and eczema.
PREPARATION
Fresh green stems and leaves are picked 
just before the plant ﬂowers, then ﬁnely 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
COMMON NAMES
Nightshade, woody nightshade, bitter 
nightshade, felonwort.
See also Severe eczema,  page 194 ; Sore throat,  page 226Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for rest.
Joint pain
SYMPTOMS  Stiffness and pain in joints, 
aggravated by damp.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for 
extremes of temperature; for inactivity.Since the time of ancient Rome, nightshade has been 
used to treat a wide range of ailments. One such 
ailment, abscesses called “felons” on the fingertips, 
inspired one of the plant’s common names, felonwort. The 
18th-century Swedish naturalist Carolus Linnaeus prescribed the 
plant to treat fever and inflammatory infections. The homeopathic 
remedy, proved in 1811 by Hahnemann, is traditionally associated 
with people who are highly susceptible to damp and chills.Leaves and twigs are 
used herbally to treat 
skin problems
Leaves and unripe 
berries are most 
toxic parts of plant
NIGHTSHADE  A stimulant, diuretic, and 
antirheumatic plant, nightshade is highly toxic and 
therefore generally used only by trained herbalists.

•63
NUX VOMICAStrychnos nux-vomica
REMEDY PROFILE
Nux vomica  is chiefly linked to workaholic 
personalities who drive themselves to stress 
and excess. Ambitious and pushy, they 
thrive on challenges, and often work in 
entrepreneurial or managerial jobs. The 
typical pattern is of someone who is 
oversensitive and intolerant of criticism,  
yet perfectionist and often very critical of 
others. Such highly driven people tend to 
overload their bodies at play as well as at 
work. They tend to have high sex drives, 
consume too much rich food, coffee, and 
alcohol, and abuse drugs. This indulgence 
can create tension and sleeplessness, and 
often leads to digestive disorders (most 
seriously, peptic ulcers, irritable bowel 
syndrome, or liver problems when the body 
can no longer keep up with the lifestyle).
If the profile matches, Nux vomica  is given 
for irritability, insomnia, digestive 
symptoms, colds and influenza, asthma, 
cystitis, and menstrual or pregnancy 
problems. T ypically symptoms are worse  
for cold, noise, light, and odors.
Irritability & insomnia
SYMPTOMS  Hangover-like symptoms, with 
disrupted sleep and great irascibility , due to  
an excessive lifestyle with too much alcohol, 
coffee, or other stimulants. A headache that 
feels as if a nail has been driven into the 
forehead is typical, as is waking at around  
4 a.m. feeling very irritable and unable to 
sleep again until morning.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest;  
for hot drinks.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for open air;  
for noise; for light; for strong odors.Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion, and vomiting with 
painful retching. Diarrhea is accompanied by 
abdominal cramps, and nausea by colicky pain. 
Constipation may make it difficult to empty the 
bowel fully . Hemorrhoids and constipation may 
be due to rectal spasms. The abdomen is often 
bloated and flatulent. There may be cravings for 
stimulants or spicy , fatty , or rich foods, even 
though these only aggravate symptoms.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for resting;  
for sleep; for firm pressure on the abdomen;  
in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touch; for noise; 
for mental overexertion; for repressing 
emotions; between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m.;  
for stimulants; for eating; for spicy foods.
Colds & influenza
SYMPTOMS  Runny catarrh by day , especially  
in warm rooms, but a blocked nose at night. 
There may be sneezing, a sore throat and dry , 
tickly cough, headaches, and watery , sensitive 
eyes, or influenza with aching muscles and  
a shivery fever.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for sleep;  
for being left alone; in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For cold, dry weather;  
for touch; for noise; for overexertion; between  
3 a.m. and 4 a.m.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Cystitis with spasmodic pain in the 
bladder, and a frequent but ineffectual urge to 
urinate. Early , irregular, or heavy menstruation 
with cramping pains is treated with the 
remedy , as is menstruation preceded by 
faintness, and premenstrual syndrome with a 
violent temper. In pregnancy Nux vomica  may 
be used to help ease fatigue, frequent KEY SYMPTOMS  irritability • overly critical nature • tendency to be  
highly driven and ambitious • chilliness • desire for rich foods and 
stimulants • indigestion and constipation • sleeplessness
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to southeast Asia, the tree grows in 
sandy soil in dry forests of India, Burma, 
Thailand, China, and Australia.
BACKGROUND
A rat poison in medieval Europe, and also 
used to treat the plague. Indian herbalists 
use the bark to treat cholera, and in Nepal  
it is prescribed for menstrual problems, 
rabies, and paralysis.
PREPARATION
The dried, ripe seeds are steeped in alcohol 
for at least ﬁve days, before being ﬁltered, 
diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Poison-nut tree, Quaker buttons (seeds),  
nux vomica, vomit weed.
See also Headaches,  page 218 ; Indigestion,  page 234 ; Irritability,  page 244 ; Cystitis,  page 260 ; Morning sickness,  page 262MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
urination, numbness in the arms, leg cramps, 
constipation, and morning sickness.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for sleep;  
in the evening; for firm pressure on the 
affected area; for being left alone; for  
washing; for warm compresses.
Symptoms worse  For mental overexertion;  
for touch; for noise; for stimulants; for eating;  
for spicy foods.The poison-nut tree was brought to Europe from southeast Asia in the  
15th century . Strychnine, the toxic alkaloid from its seeds, was famous  
as a poison before 17th-century physicians discovered its stimulating  
effect on the digestive and nervous systems. Small doses can be diuretic,  
stimulate the appetite, and aid digestion, but excessive amounts can be  
fatal. Nux vomica  was proved by Hahnemann in 1805.
POISON-NUT TREE  In large doses, the strychnine 
present in this plant induces intense spasms of 
the diaphragm, causing respiration to cease, 
leading to death by suffocation.Leaves, seeds,  
and bark all contain  
the poison strychnineSEEDS
Buttonlike seeds are 
obtained from fruit of treeTWIG

64•
Thuja occidentalis
THUJA
REMEDY PROFILE
Serious, sensitive people who are easily 
upset and feel that they are unlovable 
respond best to Thuja . They may try to 
present a pleasing image to the world but,  
if reactions are negative, they neglect their 
appearance, becoming secretive and 
depressed. Delusions about the body may 
be evident, as may fanatical ideas or 
paranoia, with a feeling that others are 
trying to manipulate them. They tend to 
sleep badly.
Thuja  is used for skin and urogenital 
disorders, headaches, and respiratory or 
menstrual problems. T ypically there is 
localized pain, exhaustion, and rapid weight 
loss. Symptoms may be due to health changes 
following a vaccination, or date back to a bout 
of gonorrhea.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Large, “cauliflower” warts, and 
warts that weep, sting, or are on stalks. 
There may be scaly patches on covered 
body areas, itchy skin complaints, brown 
“age spots,” and ridged, weak, or deformed 
nails. Thuja  is widely used as an ointment 
for warts and verrucas.
Symptoms better  For free flow of discharges 
and catarrh.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; after 
gonorrhea; after a vaccination.
Urogenital problems
SYMPTOMS  Swollen, inflamed urethra, with 
urine stream split and weak, and frequent 
strong urges to urinate, perhaps with trickling incontinence. In men, 
urethral infection is common,  
usually with a discharge and possibly 
affecting the prostate gland. In women, 
there may be vaginal infection, often with 
profuse discharge. Inflammation may spread 
through the pelvic area. Genital warts and 
herpes may develop, as may ulcers and 
uterine polyps. Thuja  may also be given  
to treat suppressed gonorrhea.
Symptoms better  For warm air; for drawing  
up the limbs.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for 
movement; for urinating; for gonorrhea.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Piercing neuralgic pain due to 
stress, exhaustion, or overexcitement, or 
related to inflamed gums, tooth decay , or 
infected sinuses.
Symptoms better  For tilting the  
head backward.
Symptoms worse  For sexual excess; for tea.
Catarrh & sinusitis
SYMPTOMS  Chronic sinus or respiratory 
problems, usually with foul-smelling, green or 
yellow-green catarrh. Asthma may respond to 
Thuja , as may nasal polyps with thick, green, 
bloody mucus containing pus.
Symptoms better  For warm air; for expelling 
catarrh.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; during 
menstruation; for tobacco.
Menstrual problems
SYMPTOMS  Early or scant menstrual periods. 
There may be menstrual pain that is localized KEY SYMPTOMS  warts and polyps • feeling of being 
unlovable • complaints that develop after vaccination or 
gonorrhea • delusions • nail problems • catarrhMAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native to Canada and the eastern US, but 
now also widely cultivated as an ornamental 
tree. Prefers swamps and other wetlands.
BACKGROUND
Featured in the US Pharmacopoeia  
until 1894. Used in modern herbalism  
to treat warts, cancer, catarrh, and  
other conditions.
PREPARATION
The fresh leaves and twigs of the one-  
year-old plant are chopped ﬁnely and 
macerated in alcohol, then ﬁltered, diluted, 
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Arbor vitae, tree of life, white cedar.
See also Prostate problems,  page 202 ; Depression,  page 212 ; Warts,  page 242over the left ovary . Ovarian cysts may also 
respond to Thuja .
Symptoms better  For drawing up the limbs;  
for lying on the affected side or on the back.
Symptoms worse  On the left side; during 
menstruation; after gonorrhea.Arbor vitae was used by American Indians as a source 
of hard-wearing wood and of herbal medicine for fever, 
coughs, menstrual problems, headaches, and muscle 
and joint pain. European settlers later incorporated it into  
their herbal lore, and it has also become a popular ornamental tree  
in European gardens. The remedy Thuja  was proved by Hahnemann,  
and published in his Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34).
ARBOR VITAE  American Indians burned arbor  
vitae for its smoky scent, which was deemed  
to ward off evil spirits.Twigs are highly 
fragrant when 
bruised or cutLeaves are toxic 
if ingested

•65
VERATRUM ALB.Veratrum album
REMEDY PROFILE
Veratrum alb.  is thought to work best on 
those who appear restless, self-righteous, 
overly critical, haughty, melancholy, and 
solitary, or who loathe being alone. A 
hyperactive or manic state, possibly with 
repetitive behavior, may be evident in 
people who are best suited to this remedy.
T ypical physical symptoms include a poor 
immune system; extremely cold skin and 
perspiration, with chilliness possibly 
extending to the breath and tongue; a blue 
pallor; a rapid pulse; weakness; anemia; 
extreme thirst; or cravings for fruit or ice 
cream. Symptoms tend to become worse for 
damp cold, at night, following a bowel 
movement, and after eating fruit.
The remedy is usually given for debilitating 
gastrointestinal problems with severe vomiting 
and diarrhea. It is also used to treat collapse 
and some psychological problems.
Diarrhea
SYMPTOMS  Severe diarrhea, possibly with 
vomiting  (see right) , due to cholera, 
dysentery, gastroenteritis, or other digestive 
disorders. Stools are watery, green, or 
colorless. Painful cramps may accompany 
attacks, and exhaustion may follow   
(see above, right) , caused by dehydration and 
exhaustion. There may be a great thirst for 
cold water and a ravenous appetite, as well 
as cravings for sour foods, ice, and salt.
Symptoms better  For lying down; for hot drinks, 
warm foods, and milk.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for movement; for 
cold drinks.Collapse
SYMPTOMS  Weakness with a clammy , sweaty 
forehead, blue-tinged skin, dehydration, and 
possible fainting. This may be due to cramps, 
violent vomiting, and diarrhea  (see left) , 
especially in pregnancy . Other potential  
causes include acute fright, menstrual pain,  
or heatstroke.
Symptoms better  For being covered;  
for lying down.
Symptoms worse  For touch; at night;  
for bowel movements; for cold drinks.
Emotional problems
SYMPTOMS  Behavioral disorders such as 
hyperactivity in some children or emotional 
disturbances due to the trauma of 
childbirth. Behavior may be sullen and 
indifferent. There may be adult insecurity 
about social position or a lack of one, 
alternating with ruthless ambition and 
delusions of grandeur or of becoming the 
victim of some tragedy.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for lying down;  
in children who are carried quickly.
Symptoms worse  At night; for exertion; for 
fright; before and during menstruation; for 
injured pride.
Vomiting & nausea
SYMPTOMS  Violent vomiting with nausea, a 
cold feeling in the abdomen, clammy sweat, 
salty saliva, and possibly also diarrhea and 
collapse  (see left and above) .
Symptoms better  For lying down; for being 
covered; for hot drinks, warm foods, and milk.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for the slightest 
movement; at night; for cold drinks.KEY SYMPTOMS  profuse diarrhea • vomiting with exhaustion • cold perspiration  
• blue-tinged skin • fainting • hyperactivity or melancholy
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Grows in mountainous areas, damp 
meadows, and open woodlands in central  
and southern Europe, northern Asia, and 
north Africa.
BACKGROUND
Reputedly used by the ancient Greek 
physician Hippocrates to cure a young 
Athenian who had contracted cholera.
PREPARATION
The fresh root is dug up before ﬂowering, 
chopped, macerated in alcohol,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
White hellebore, false hellebore.
See also Nausea & vomiting,  page 236 ; Diarrhea,  page 238MAJOR PLANT REMEDIES
Extremely toxic in all its parts, white hellebore was reputedly used in 
ancient Rome on the tips of weapons. Its toxicity has limited white 
hellebore’s role in herbal medicine, although the plant has been used in 
insecticides and veterinary medicine. The remedy was proved by 
Hahnemann between 1826 and 1830. Along with Camphor , it was 
successfully used to treat victims of the 19th-century cholera epidemic in 
Europe, helping to make Hahnemann’s reputation.
WHITE HELLEBORE  It is said that fatality rarely 
results from accidentally eating this toxic plant,  
for upon ingestion it instantly causes vomiting.LEAVES  
& STEMLeaves are smooth 
on top, hairy 
underneath
RHIZOME
Alkaloids in the 
root are thought 
to lower blood 
pressure



major mineral 
remedies
although not in such common usage for 
healing purposes as plants, naturally 
occurring minerals and manufactured 
mineral and chemical compounds do have 
a long medicinal tradition. this section 
outlines the major mineral-based 
homeopathic remedies.

68•
Acidum arsenicosum syn. Arsenicum album
ARSEN. ALB.
REMEDY PROFILE
Those most suited to Arsen. alb.  are affectionate, 
sensitive, and stable in good health, but may be 
prone to restlessness, stress, and anxiety about 
their health, with a deep need for reassurance. 
Illness brings rapid physical and mental 
exhaustion and chaos, which heightens their 
fears and vulnerability , and can cause severe 
anxiety or pessimism. Perfectionists by nature, 
they are intolerant of disorder, and when under 
stress or ill may develop phobias or 
obsessions—for example, about cleanliness. 
They like alcohol, warm drinks, and warm, 
sour, sweet, and fatty foods.
Arsen. alb.  is a key remedy for asthma and 
breathlessness. It is also prescribed for violent 
digestive upsets with diarrhea and vomiting, 
headaches, burning eye inflammation, and 
itchy , weepy skin complaints.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  Asthma or severe breathlessness, 
possibly brought on by stress or anxiety . There 
is typically susceptibility to colds, violent 
sneezing, and hay fever. Burning, watery 
catarrh causes the nostrils and lips to become 
dry , cracked, and sensitive. Weakness and 
extreme fatigue are common.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement; 
for sitting upright; for warm drinks.
Symptoms worse  For cold, dry, windy weather; 
between midnight and 2 a.m.; for stress; on the 
right side of the body; for cold foods and drinks.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion and colitis, aggravated by 
stress and anxiety . Watery , offensive-smelling 
stools cause soreness around the anus and burning pain in the rectum. There may be 
vomiting or diarrhea followed by exhaustion and 
dehydration. Excessive consumption of alcohol, 
ripe fruit and vegetables, and iced foods may 
cause gastroenteritis. If there is any fever, the 
body feels hot to the touch while chilled inside, 
or cold to the touch but burning inside.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement; for 
lying with the head propped up; for sips of water.
Symptoms worse  For exposure to the cold; 
between midnight and 2 a.m.; for stress; for 
cold foods and drinks.
Food poisoning
SYMPTOMS  Burning, stinging vomiting, with 
exhaustion and dehydration, and nausea on 
the sight or smell of food.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement; 
for sips of water.
Symptoms worse  For cold; between midnight 
and 2 a.m.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Pain beginning at the bridge  
of the nose and extending over the entire 
head, with dizziness, vomiting, and nausea. 
Excitement, stress, and anxiety may  
aggravate the pain.
Symptoms better  For cold air; for cold 
compresses.
Symptoms worse  For stress or excitement;  
for overheating; for tobacco smoke; for the 
smell of food.
Eye inflammation
SYMPTOMS  Inflamed, stinging eyes with 
burning pains and sensitivity to bright light.
Symptoms better  For warm compresses.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for tobacco smoke.KEY SYMPTOMS  anxiety about health • restlessness and exhaustion • chilliness  
• thirst for small sips of water • burning pains that are better for warmthMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Extracted from the mineral arsenopyrite, 
which is found in Norway, Sweden, Germany, 
England, and Canada.
BACKGROUND
Has long been used in Europe and the  
US as a preservative for tanning animal 
hides, and is also traditionally used to  
make rat poison.
PREPARATION
Arsenic is triturated by being ground 
repeatedly with lactose sugar until it is 
soluble in water. It is then further diluted 
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Arsenic, arsenic trioxide, arsenic oxide, 
arsenious acid.
See also Respiration,  page 180 ; Digestion,  pages 188 , 234; Skin,  pages 192 , 240; Depression,  page 212 ; Anxiety,  page 244Eczema
SYMPTOMS  Itching, burning, cracked skin. 
Scratching causes weeping, bleeding, raw skin.
Symptoms better  For warm compresses;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For anxiety; between midnight 
and 2 a.m.Arsenic is well known as a deadly poison. In the past it was used  
to make flypaper and wallpaper, sometimes leading to accidental 
poisonings: Napoleon’s death has recently been attributed to arsenic 
used to color his wallpaper, which may have formed a deadly gas  
in damp, moldy conditions. Arsen. alb. , proved by Hahnemann and 
published in his Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34), is given chiefly to 
treat the mucous membranes of the digestive and respiratory tracts.
ARSENIC  In the past doctors used arsenic to  
treat eczema, but it is now considered too toxic.Crystals are 
a natural 
source of 
arsenicARSENOPYRITE
Arsenopyrite forms 
as prismatic crystals

•69
FLUORIC AC.Acidum hydrofluoricum
REMEDY PROFILE
Fluoric ac.  suits people who are energetic, 
lively , and bustling in the early stages of 
illness, but rapidly become exhausted and 
forgetful as it progresses.
Spiritually and emotionally these people 
have a tendency to be extremely limited, 
and they are highly materialistic. As a result, 
they generally neglect their relationships, 
showing indifference to family and loved 
ones. Often, they cut themselves off from 
others. Their shallow relationships indicate 
an inability to connect deeply with others. 
Prone to self-satisfaction and egotism, they 
dislike any responsibility or commitment  
in their relationships. They tend to be 
dominant in relationships, and may become 
obsessed with sexual intercourse. An 
excessive sexual drive may lead to behavior 
that is amoral and promiscuous.
Fluoric ac.  is used to treat fibrous tissue 
disorders, usually affecting the bones, teeth, 
nails, hair, and veins. It is prescribed for 
certain sexual problems, varicose veins,  
hair loss and baldness related to prolonged 
illness, and ear and nasal discharges. It may 
also help osteomyelitis (bone infection).
Sexual problems
SYMPTOMS  In men, especially in old age, 
increased sexual desire and erections at 
night, perhaps preventing sleep. The 
scrotum may swell, and varicoceles 
(testicular varicose veins) may develop. 
There may be nymphomania.
Symptoms better  For a cold shower; following  
a short sleep.
Symptoms worse  For heat; at night; for alcohol.Tooth decay
SYMPTOMS  Teeth decay easily , perhaps 
becoming discolored, mottled, and brittle.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  None known.
Nail conditions
SYMPTOMS  Weak, distorted, and crumbling nails 
that tend to grow too quickly , becoming too 
thick in some places or corrugated in others.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For alcohol.
Varicose veins
SYMPTOMS  Prominent, painful, enlarged veins 
in the backs of the calves and insides of the 
legs. The affected area may ache, and the pain 
may be aggravated by standing for prolonged 
periods of time.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for cold 
compresses.
Symptoms worse  For heat; at night; for alcohol.
Alopecia
SYMPTOMS  Patchy baldness in both sexes, 
perhaps after prolonged illness. Hair tends 
to fall out easily, and new growth is 
typically dry and brittle.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for cold 
compresses.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for alcohol.
Discharges from the ears & 
nose
SYMPTOMS  Ear infection with profuse discharge 
after a period of stress, prolonged illness, or 
depression. Copious, runny catarrh may “drip 
like a faucet” from the nose, and may be 
associated with hay fever.KEY SYMPTOMS materialistic and unspiritual nature • indifference to loved ones  
• preoccupation with sexual intercourse • weakness in the bones, nails, and hair
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Prepared by distilling ﬂuorite (ﬂuorspar) with 
sulfuric acid to create hydrogen ﬂuoride gas, 
which is then dissolved in water to produce 
hydroﬂuoric acid.
BACKGROUND
Prescribed in traditional Chinese medicine 
for the treatment of anxiety, insomnia, and 
coughs. Used industrially in the manufacture 
of enamel, glass, and jewelry.
PREPARATION
Hydroﬂuoric acid is ﬁrst dissolved in alcohol, 
before being repeatedly diluted further in 
alcohol and succussed between each dilution.
COMMON NAME
Hydroﬂuoric acid.
See also Cancer,  page 208MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
Symptoms better  For being in open air; for  
a cool room; following a short sleep.
Symptoms worse  For heat; at night; for alcohol.
Bone conditions
SYMPTOMS  Painful, inflamed, tender bones 
following injury or a bone infection such  
as osteomyelitis, with swelling around the 
infected bone.
Symptoms better  For a cool room; for bathing 
in cold water; following a short sleep.
Symptoms worse  For heat; at night; for alcohol.Fluorine, a component of hydrofluoric acid, is found chiefly in the mineral fluorite 
(fluorspar). It is essential for healthy teeth and gums, and a compound of it, fluoride, 
is often added to toothpastes and the water supplies of some countries to help  
prevent tooth decay . Some homeopaths believe that fluorine intake from these  
sources can be excessive and can, in certain people, cause health problems that may  
be treated with this remedy . Fluoric ac.  was proved by Dr. Constantine Hering, and 
published in his Guiding Symptoms of Our Materia Medica  (1879–91).
YELLOW FLUORITE  This is one of the several 
different colored forms of the mineral fluorite 
(fluorspar). This mineral is distilled with sulfuric  
acid to produce fluoric acid.

70•
Acidum nitricum
NITRIC AC.
REMEDY PROFILE
An underlying discontent is evident in those 
who respond best to Nitric ac.  This may be 
due to the extreme discomfort of their 
physical symptoms. Their behavior is often 
bitter and unforgiving, and they tend to dwell 
in the past. They are typically selfish, bad-
tempered, explosively angry , and critical. 
Hypersensitivity may cause these people to 
worry that they are offending others, to be 
easily offended themselves, or to feel that 
others are trying to deceive them.
Prolonged emotional and mental suffering 
often leads to ill-health in these individuals. 
They fear death and worry incessantly about 
their health, often believing that their own 
suffering is much worse than others’ and must 
therefore be treated immediately . Discharges 
such as urine and perspiration are typically 
offensive-smelling. A tendency to feel the cold 
is common, as are cravings for fat and salt. 
Any jarring motion, such as that of a moving 
car or train, usually makes them feel worse, as 
does drinking milk.
Nitric ac.  is used mainly for painful skin 
ailments, especially where the mucous 
membranes meet the skin of the mouth, nose, 
or anus. The conditions treated by this 
remedy often manifest in the skin before going 
on to affect the internal organs. It is also used 
for warts, hemorrhoids, anal fissures, mouth 
ulcers, and catarrh.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Cracked, broken skin, and fissures 
that bleed slightly but easily . The nipples may 
be sore and cracked. Severe acne may develop, as may boils, facial blackheads, 
pimples, and skin ulcers. The skin is prone to 
profuse, foul-smelling sweat. Skin complaints 
are accompanied by splinterlike, cutting pains 
that appear and disappear suddenly .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for warm 
compresses; for steady, even pressure on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touch.
Warts
SYMPTOMS  Big, jagged, moist warts on the 
hands, with sharp pain and possible bleeding. 
There may be anal warts with splinterlike 
pain, notably after passing stools  (see below) . 
Stools and urine often smell foul.
Symptoms better  For warm coverings.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for washing.
Hemorrhoids
SYMPTOMS  Extremely painful hemorrhoids, 
possibly with bleeding and splinterlike pain, a 
burning sensation, and rectal ulcers. Passing 
stools may involve great strain and effort but 
little result. Agonizing pain may follow 
straining or passing a stool, possibly lasting 
for hours. Hemorrhoids may be accompanied 
by nausea, vomiting, constipation, and foul-
smelling anal discharges.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for warm 
compresses; for pressure on the hemorrhoids.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for the slightest 
jarring; for milk.
Anal fissures
SYMPTOMS  A cracked, sore rectum with 
splinterlike pains and bleeding, due to tearing 
on passing a stool. Agonizing pain when KEY SYMPTOMS  anxiety about health • splinterlike pains • cracks  
in mucous membranes at orifices • offensive-smelling discharges  
• irritability • oversensitivity • chilliness • dissatisfactionMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Chemically prepared from sodium nitrate  
(a white, soluble mineral) and sulfuric acid 
(a corrosive liquid produced from sulfur).
BACKGROUND
Used in 18th-century Europe to burn off warts 
and as a treatment for chest and bladder 
complaints, kidney stones, and fever.
PREPARATION
Made by diluting one part nitric acid in nine 
parts pure alcohol. This mixture is then 
diluted and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Nitric acid, aqua fortis.
See also  Candidiasis,  page 200 ; Cancer,  page 208passing stools may lead to constipation.
Symptoms better  For warm coverings; for hot 
compresses.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for jarring movement.
Mouth ulcers
SYMPTOMS  Sharp, splinterlike pain with ulcers 
on the tongue, or in the mouth or throat. 
There may be halitosis with bleeding gums. 
The gums may feel soft and spongy and the 
teeth may be loose.
Symptoms better  For hot compresses.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for swallowing; 
after eating. 
Catarrh
SYMPTOMS  Profuse, yellow burning catarrh, 
raw nostrils with splinterlike pain, and green 
crusts on the nostrils on waking. Nosebleeds 
may occur.
Symptoms better  For mild weather.
Symptoms worse  For winter; for cold, damp air; 
at night; for fatty foods; for milk.Nitric acid was first developed by Arabian chemists in the 11th century .  
By the 18th century it was in use medicinally for burning off warts, and  
for treating skin complaints, syphilis, chest infections, and fevers. It has many  
modern commercial applications, being used in the manufacture of fertilizers, 
varnishes, nylon, lacquers, chemicals, and explosives. Nitric ac.  was proved by 
Hahnemann and published in his Chronic Diseases  (1821–34). He used it  
chiefly for painful skin conditions, and for miasms such as Sycosis  (see page 20) .NITRIC ACID  Produced 
commercially from ammonia, this 
acid is highly corrosive and gives 
off fumes that are extremely 
irritant and toxic if inhaled.Stoppered jar prevents the escape 
of toxic fumes given off by acid

•71
PHOSPHORIC AC.Acidum phosphoricum
REMEDY PROFILE
Phosphoric ac.  is especially suited to mild, calm, 
gentle people who tend to be sensitive and 
emotionally dependent on others. When in  
good health, they are usually strong, but their 
constitutions are easily undermined by 
debilitating illness, emotional trauma, 
homesickness, or repeated drug abuse,  
leading to severe exhaustion.
Profuse perspiration and chilliness are 
typical symptoms, as are loss of appetite and a 
craving for refreshing drinks and juicy fruits. 
The remedy is used for acute grief or stress, 
severe exhaustion, diarrhea, and headaches. It 
is also given for childhood growing pains and 
insomnia or exam nerves.
Grief or shock
SYMPTOMS  Apathy , lethargy , and total 
indifference, brought on by emotional trauma, 
such as shock or acute grief, possibly due to a 
broken love affair or the death of a loved one. 
The memory may become poor, and there may 
be premature graying of the hair or hair loss.
Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  For noise; for emotional stress.
Exhaustion
SYMPTOMS  Extreme physical fatigue and 
mental sluggishness, leading to listlessness 
and apathy . Possible causes include mental or 
emotional strain such as overwork, exam 
nerves  (see right) , grief, or shock  (see above) . 
Drug abuse or severe loss of fluids may also 
trigger this form of exhaustion. Hair loss or 
premature graying of the hair may be 
associated symptoms if acute shock, grief, or 
stress is the cause. Headaches  (see right) , lack 
of concentration, poor memory , and insomnia 
may also occur.Symptoms better  For sleep; for short naps.
Symptoms worse  For physical exertion; for 
emotional stress; upon waking; for talking.
Diarrhea
SYMPTOMS  Profuse, watery , thin stools, 
especially during hot weather. Stools are often 
passed involuntarily , and are accompanied by 
flatulence and a distended, bloated feeling in 
the abdomen, possibly with cramping pain. 
The diarrhea does not in itself cause fatigue, 
although exhaustion follows after eating or 
due to loss of fluids  (see below, left) .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for short naps; 
for passing stools.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for drafts;  
for emotional stress; for standing;  
for eating dry foods.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Pain that is like a crushing weight on 
the temples or the top of the head, possibly with 
dizziness and eye strain. These headaches 
particularly affect schoolchildren, especially girls, 
who are overstudying for exams  (see right) , and 
those stressed at work. They may also be caused 
by exhaustion, grief  (see left) , or prolonged 
periods of standing or walking.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement; 
for short naps; for pressure on the affected 
area; for excitement.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for emotional 
stress; for overstudying; for loss of fluids;  
for noise; for music; for talking; in the evening.
Growing pains
SYMPTOMS  Rapid growth and development of  
a gangly frame, causing growing pains in the 
limbs in children. An overactive libido may 
develop, characterized by frequent 
masturbation accompanied by feelings of guilt KEY SYMPTOMS  ailments that are triggered by grief • fatigue  
• apathy • chilliness • cravings for fruits and juicy foods
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Produced by grinding a phosphate rock such 
as apatite into a powder and then mixing it 
with sulfuric acid.
BACKGROUND
Once used by doctors in Europe and the  
US to stimulate the digestion; now taken  
to lower high blood-calcium levels.
PREPARATION
Phosphoric acid is dissolved in alcohol in  
a ratio of 1:9. It is then repeatedly diluted 
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Phosphoric acid, glacial phosphoric acid, 
orthophosphoric acid.
See also Diabetes,  page 191 ; Chronic fatigue syndrome,  page 205 ; Grief,  page 213MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
that may ultimately cause emotional strain 
and exhaustion  (see left) .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for short naps; 
for pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For fatigue; for emotional 
stress.
Exam nerves
SYMPTOMS  Headaches  (see left) , with possible 
eye strain due to overstudying. Dizziness and 
even complete exhaustion  (see left)  may 
accompany the headaches. Girls are especially 
prone to this type of stress.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement; 
for short naps.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for emotional 
stress; for overstudying; for noise; for music; 
for talking; in the evening.Phosphoric acid is widely used in the drinks industry to give soft drinks a  
fruity , acidic flavor. It is also used industrially to rustproof metals, and in the 
manufacture of sugar, fertilizers, detergents, waxes, polishes, and pharmaceutical 
products. Phosphoric ac. , proved by Hahnemann and published in his Materia 
Medica Pura  (1821–34), is prescribed primarily for profound exhaustion, and is 
also a useful addition to the traveler’s first-aid kit for treating mild diarrhea. PHOSPHORIC ACID  This acid is made from 
phosphorus, which occurs naturally as apatite.APATITEPrismatic green apatite 
crystals form in igneous rock

72•
Aluminum oxydatum
ALUMINA
REMEDY PROFILE
Alumina  is best suited to those who are generally 
sluggish. They may be in a state of deep despair, 
and fear that something awful is about to 
happen. Fear of insanity is not uncommon, 
especially on sighting sharp objects and knives, 
which may even trigger suicidal thoughts. 
Reactions to external stimuli and questions are 
slow , yet despite this, these people often feel a 
sense of haste, hurry , and confusion.
T ypical physical symptoms include dry , gray 
skin and dry , sore mucous membranes. In 
addition, there may be a lack of coordination, 
weakness, and fatigue, possibly associated 
with chronic illness.
Alumina  is typically used for elderly 
people who are senile and confused, with a 
poor memory. It is also suited to delicate 
babies. The remedy is given to treat fatigue, 
nervous complaints, constipation, and 
unusual food cravings.
Fatigue
SYMPTOMS  Great weakness, sluggishness,  
and exhaustion. The skin is pallid, and  
the legs are heavy and tired, even when 
sitting. This weakness may be the result  
of chronic illness.
Symptoms better  For damp weather; for 
moderate exertion; while eating.
Symptoms worse  For warm rooms; upon 
waking; for lying or sitting down.
Nervous disorders
SYMPTOMS  Numbness, “pins and needles,” a 
sensation of muscle paralysis and fatigue, and 
slow, weak movements. The extremities may 
become uncoordinated (locomotor ataxia), and the eye muscles may be 
affected, causing drooping 
eyelids and squinting.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; 
in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; in the 
morning; for salty and starchy foods.
Dementia
SYMPTOMS  Deterioration of mental processes 
leading to sluggish and absent-minded 
behavior. Those affected may forget who 
they are and feel as if they are talking, 
hearing, or smelling through someone else’s 
senses. There is often a sense of being adrift 
from the body. Elderly people are most 
commonly affected. The remedy may be 
given to treat Alzheimer’s disease.
Symptoms better  For damp weather; in the 
evening; for moderate exertion.
Symptoms worse  For warm rooms; upon waking.
Constipation
SYMPTOMS  Sluggish bowels or severe 
constipation. The rectum characteristically feels 
paralyzed, and great effort is required to expel 
even small, soft stools. Pregnant women, 
newborn babies, and children are most 
commonly affected. Alumina  may  
also help elderly or sedentary people who have 
severe constipation and no urge to pass stools.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; in the evening; 
for warm foods and drinks.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for heat; in the 
morning; for salty and starchy foods.
Appetite disorders
SYMPTOMS  A dry mouth and throat, with 
cravings for dry foods or inedible substances KEY SYMPTOMS sense of feeling hurried and flustered • fatigue and sluggishness  
• failing memory • dryness of the skin and mucous membranesMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Obtained from bauxite, a dense mineral that 
is predominantly found in Ghana, Jamaica, 
the US, France, Italy, Hungary, Indonesia, 
and Russia.
BACKGROUND
Used as an antacid in indigestion remedies, 
and in cooking utensils. Controversially 
thought by some to be a factor in triggering 
the onset of Alzheimer’s disease.
PREPARATION
Aluminum oxide crystals are extracted from 
bauxite using an industrial process. They are 
then triturated with lactose sugar, ﬁltered, 
diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Aluminum oxide, pure clay.
See also Constipation,  page 238such as pencils, chalk, clay , tea leaves, and 
coffee grounds. The cravings appear to be for 
substances that actually contain aluminum.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; in the evening; 
for warm foods and drinks.
Symptoms worse  For starchy, salty, or highly 
processed foods.Significant amounts of aluminum absorbed into the body are thought by 
some to cause the mental processes to slow down. Some evidence suggests 
that it may aid the development of Alzheimer’s disease. Sources of ingested 
aluminum in humans may include drinking water, baking powder, food 
additives, and indigestion remedies. Alumina , proved by Hahnemann and 
published in his Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34), is given chiefly 
for sluggish states and dementia.
ALUMINUM  The mineral bauxite is the main 
source of aluminum, since it is composed 
of hydrated aluminum oxides.Rock is 
very dense 
and hard
BAUXITE
POWDERED ALUMINUM

•73
AMMONIUM CARB.Ammonium carbonicum
REMEDY PROFILE
This remedy is best suited to people who 
polarize between a fast, excitable, idealistic 
state and one that is absent-minded, confused, 
and chaotic. Their initial idealism may lead 
them to misjudge their own abilities, resulting 
in disappointment, resentment, or a feeling 
that they will never succeed.
These people typically search for values and 
beliefs as a means of establishing a structure 
and overview for their lives. If these structures 
begin to drop away , perhaps due to stress or 
illness, for example, they typically try to 
“battle on,” exhausted and muddled. They are 
sensitive to other people and to any distress 
they may be experiencing, but are also 
inclined to be challenging and disobedient. 
They have a tendency to be forgetful, gloomy , 
weepy , and bad-tempered, especially during 
cloudy weather.
Physical symptoms typically treated with 
Ammonium carb.  include severe fatigue, skin 
eruptions, chesty respiratory conditions such 
as bronchitis, and problems generated by a 
sluggish circulation. It may also be used for 
scarlet fever.
  
Fatigue
SYMPTOMS  Extreme fatigue, possibly with great 
weakness, fainting, irritability , and depression. 
The temperament typically changes from 
idealistic and positive to gloomy , chaotic, 
confused, absent-minded, and hysterical. An 
overwhelming sensation that “things cannot 
go on like this” may be felt, with initial zest 
and sparkle giving way to a scattered, 
exhausted feeling. Ultimately , these symptoms 
may lead to feelings of depression and 
nervous exhaustion.
Symptoms better  For warm, dry surroundings; for raising the feet.
Symptoms worse  In cloudy weather;  
for continuous movement.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  A sensation of oppression in the 
chest, with a recurrent, dry , tickling, rattling 
cough. The cough may be persistent enough 
to cause retching, especially at night, and 
severe enough to cause palpitations. The 
remedy is commonly used for bronchitis and 
other chest problems.
Symptoms better  For warm, dry surroundings; 
for pressure on the chest; for raising the feet.
Symptoms worse  In cloudy weather;  
for continuous movement.
Poor circulation
SYMPTOMS  Breathlessness, wheezing, 
palpitations, and fatigue, particularly 
following exertion. Symptoms are often 
accompanied by a flushed, puffy face, and are 
typically due to inefficient circulation of blood 
by the heart.
Symptoms better  For warm, dry surroundings; 
for raising the feet.
Symptoms worse  In cloudy weather;  
for continuous movement.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Skin eruptions such as boils, 
pimples, and red blotches that are often slow 
to clear. Ammonium carb.  is used for rashes, 
urticaria (hives), and erysipelas with violent 
itching. The skin is generally prone to allergic 
reactions and sensitive, especially to water, 
and there is often a dislike of bathing or 
washing. The skin eruptions are commonly 
considered an indication of more serious 
internal problems, and are usually 
accompanied by a flushed and puffy face due KEY SYMPTOMS mental sluggishness • fatigue • fainting and weakness • breathlessness  
• sense of compression in the chest • person feels worse for cold and damp 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Chemically prepared from the crystalline 
compounds sodium carbonate  ( see page 91 ) 
and ammonium chloride ( see page 123 ).
BACKGROUND
Traditionally mixed with alcohol and lavender 
to make smelling salts, a pungent 
concoction for reviving someone who  
has fainted.
PREPARATION
The crystalline solid is diluted in distilled 
water. The resulting solution is repeatedly 
diluted and succussed to potentize it.
COMMON NAMES
Ammonium carbonate, sal volatile.
See also Depression,  page 212MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
to a weak circulation  (see left) .
Symptoms better  For warm, dry surroundings; 
for pressure on the skin; for raising the feet.
Symptoms worse  In cloudy weather;  
for continuous movement.
Scarlet fever
SYMPTOMS  A rash of tiny , red spots spreading 
rapidly over the body from the neck and the 
upper trunk, accompanied by a sore throat, 
headache, and fever.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the affected 
area; for lying on abdomen or the right side.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; between 
3 a.m. and 4 a.m.For many centuries, ammonium carbonate was used in the West to treat “blood 
poisoning” arising from scarlet fever infection. From the 19th century , however,  
its main medicinal use was in smelling salts (also called sal volatile or salts of 
ammonia), which were used to revive and stimulate those who had fainted. 
Hahnemann proved and published the remedy in his Materia Medica Pura   
(1821–34). It is considered particularly useful for states of collapse.
AMMONIUM CARBONATE  This white 
chemical is now most commonly found in 
baking powder.

74•
Argentum nitricum
ARGENTUM NIT.
REMEDY PROFILE
Argentum nit.  is best suited to people who are 
extroverted, cheerful, and impressionable. 
Suggestible and impulsive, they may have 
difficulty in controlling their far-ranging 
minds and emotions, and readily laugh, cry , 
lose their tempers, or become anxious. They 
may be nervous, phobic, and superstitious. 
Motivated people who think, talk, and act 
rapidly , they are always in a hurry , and are 
frequently to be found in careers that require 
quick thinking and a good memory , or where 
the emphasis is on performance.
T ypical physical symptoms include a 
“sensitive” digestion, a lack of physical 
control, with awkwardness and tremors, and a 
tendency to feel the heat. Argentum nit.  is used 
for certain nervous, mental, and digestive 
problems where these key physical and mental 
symptoms are evident.
Anxiety & phobias
SYMPTOMS  Anxiety , possibly accompanied by 
palpitations, tremors, awkwardness, sweats, 
insomnia, and even vomiting  (see right) . There 
is typically a feeling of being out of control, 
and the imagination may become overactive, 
spiraling off to exacerbate fears and heighten 
anxieties or phobias. Common triggers 
include stage fright, anticipatory anxiety , and 
phobias such as claustrophobia, vertigo, or 
fear of water or the dentist. People who 
respond to this remedy usually feel very 
anxious about their health.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; in cool 
surroundings; for pressure on the head, such 
as a tight bandage around it.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; in hot weather; at 
night; for movement; for lying on the left side;  
for emotional stress; for overwork; for talking.Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Diarrhea, loud, explosive belching, 
a distended abdomen, and flatulence. The 
stools are smelly , watery , and green. There 
may be vomiting exacerbated by nervousness 
or anticipatory anxiety  (see below, left) . If 
symptoms persist, colitis or irritable bowel 
syndrome  (see below)  may develop. The 
digestion is “sensitive,” with possible cravings 
for salty or sweet foods, although the latter 
may trigger headaches or diarrhea.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; in cool 
surroundings; for pressure on the abdomen.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; in hot weather; 
for lying on the left side; for emotional stress; 
for cold or sweet foods.
Irritable bowel syndrome
SYMPTOMS  Constipation that alternates with 
flatulence and diarrhea. There is a fluttery , tense 
feeling in the stomach and pain in the upper left 
abdomen; stools are usually coated with mucus.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; in cool 
surroundings; for pressure on the abdomen.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; in hot weather; 
for lying on the left side; for emotional stress; 
for cold or sweet foods.
Nervous disorders
SYMPTOMS  The limbs feel weak, bruised, and 
trembling. There is often giddiness and a 
tendency to stagger in the dark. The remedy is 
also used for twitching with numbness, which 
may follow a stroke or brain injury , or which 
may be linked to epilepsy , especially if attacks 
occur after a fright or during menstruation.  
The weakness and heaviness of the limbs may 
eventually lead to a feeling of paralysis.
Argentum nit.  may also be prescribed for 
multiple sclerosis, if the mental and physical 
symptoms fit the profile.KEY SYMPTOMS anxiety • impulsiveness • phobias • craving for sweet foods, which 
aggravate symptoms • digestive problems with flatulence • tendency to feel hot MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Found in acanthite, which usually occurs as 
crystals in hydrothermal veins in Norway, 
the US, and South America.
BACKGROUND
Used in 19th-century North America for eye 
infections and warts, and still included in 
some modern wart medicines.
PREPARATION
Pure crystals of silver nitrate are dissolved 
in alcohol before being repeatedly diluted 
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Silver nitrate, hellstone, devil’s stone,  
lunar caustic.
See also Multiple sclerosis,  page 179 ; Digestion,  pages 188, 234 ; Emotional problems,  page 210 ; Exam nerves,  page 254Symptoms better  For fresh air; in  
cool surroundings.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; at night;  
during menstruation.Medieval alchemists called this compound lunar caustic. They used its 
antibacterial and caustic properties for cauterizing wounds. If ingested in large 
amounts, silver nitrate is highly poisonous and may turn the body blue. It is now 
used in the manufacture of photographic film and plates, and as a backing for 
mirrors. Argentum nit.  was originally proved by Hahnemann, but then given a 
more thorough proving by Dr. J. O. Müller of Vienna in 1845.
SILVER NITRATE This compound forms as light-
sensitive crystals in the mineral acanthite.ACANTHITESILVER NITRATE CRYSTALS
Mineral has 
metallic luster

•75
AURUM MET.Aurum metallicum
REMEDY PROFILE
Those who are most suited to Aurum met.  
often feel as if they do not accomplish as 
much as they should. They tend to be 
workaholics, always striving to attain the 
tough standards that they set for themselves. 
If they consider that they have failed in this,  
a feeling of emptiness and despair may follow.
There is a marked tendency toward 
hypersensitivity in these people, both 
emotionally and physically , with smell, taste, 
hearing, and touch all being highly acute. As  
a result of being emotionally overcharged, 
they tend to overreact to criticism or 
contradiction, exploding into fierce anger  
with trembling and flushing.
Aurum met.  is prescribed for depression and 
grief. It is also given to treat circulatory 
problems such as palpitations and angina,  
and for headaches, disorders of the 
reproductive system, and bone pains.
Depression
SYMPTOMS  Anxiety and a sense of worthlessness, 
disenchantment with life, and despair. There  
is commonly an empty feeling, as though 
everything is just for show but lacks substance: 
it glitters but is not gold. In extreme cases this 
may lead to severe clinical depression and 
suicide. There may be a longing for death, 
possibly provoking suicidal thoughts, although  
a fear of death may coexist simultaneously .
Other symptoms include irritability , feelings 
of guilt or of being forsaken, perhaps 
associated with a shock, such as the death  
of a loved one, or a failed romance.
Symptoms better  For rest; for walking; for  
fresh air.Symptoms worse  For mental 
concentration or exertion; for emotional 
stress, particularly at night.
Angina
SYMPTOMS  Palpitations, high blood pressure, 
breathlessness, and chest pains behind the 
breastbone that extend along the arm to the 
fingertips. There may also be the sensation 
that the heart is about to stop, and that the 
blood vessels are hot. The heart may not feel 
properly lodged in the chest, and may seem to 
shake with every movement.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest; for  
fresh air.
Symptoms worse  At night; for mental or 
physical exertion; for emotional stress.
Reproductive-system problems
SYMPTOMS  Inflammation of the testes and 
undescended testicles in boys. In women, 
Aurum met.  is used for painful menstruation, 
fibroids, a prolapsed uterus, causing a 
dragging feeling in the pelvis, and a sensation 
that the uterus is enlarged. There may be 
sterility , leading to depression.
Symptoms better  For rest; for walking; for fresh 
air; for washing in cold water.
Symptoms worse  For cold; at night; for 
emotional stress.
Bone pain
SYMPTOMS  Deep, gnawing, debilitating bone 
pains, often on the right side of the jaw bone 
and in the bones of the nose. There may be 
wandering, debilitating rheumatic pains in 
the muscles.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest;  
for fresh air.KEY SYMPTOMS workaholic nature • despair at any perceived failures • bouts of  
anger and violence • angina • pains in the bones • person feels worse at night 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Found in hydrothermal veins, and 
sometimes as nuggets or grains lying in 
stream beds or sand in Australia, South 
Africa, and North America.
BACKGROUND
Given by 12th-century Arabian physicians  
for heart problems, gold was also used in 
blood tests and for tuberculosis in the early 
20th century.
PREPARATION
Gold is puriﬁed from a nugget or extracted 
from an ore. It is then triturated with  
lactose sugar, ﬁltered, diluted,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Gold.
See also Palpitations,  page 186 ; Arthritis,  page 197 ; Infertility,  page 203 ; Cancer,  page 208 ; Emotional problems,  page 210MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
Symptoms worse  At night; for exertion;  
for emotional stress.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Severe, pounding, unbearable pain, 
with veins pulsing in the temples.
Symptoms better  For rest; for fresh air.
Symptoms worse  At night; for exertion;  
for emotional stress.The ancient Egyptians were one of the earliest civilizations to master the  
art of mining and working gold. In many cultures it was ascribed great 
value on the basis of its rarity and splendor. As early as the 7th century BCE, 
gold was fashioned into coins and used as a means of exchange,  
paving the way for today’s world economy . Gold also plays a role in 
conventional medicine, being used in the treatment of rheumatoid  
arthritis. Hahnemann proved the homeopathic remedy in 1818.
GOLD NUGGET GOLD FLAKES
GOLD This heavy, inert metal is used mostly for 
aesthetic or economic purposes, but is also used 
in medicine and in dentistry, where its resistance 
to chemical reaction makes it ideal for tooth 
fillings and caps.

76•76•
Barium carbonicum syn. Baryta carbonica
BARYTA CARB.
REMEDY PROFILE
Physical, emotional, or mental development is 
usually slow in those who respond best to 
Baryta carb.  They tend to be shy and 
introverted, often because they are insecure 
and feel that they are worthless. They may 
require excessive reassurance, and are prone 
to fears and anxieties. Emotional immaturity 
can cause them to feel inadequate in 
relationships and social situations.
T ypical physical traits linked with Baryta 
carb. include nail-biting when anxious and a 
tendency to have sweaty , smelly feet. The 
remedy is used for slow development in 
children and for those with Down syndrome, 
and is also given for senile dementia in the 
elderly . In addition, Baryta carb.  is used to 
treat recurrent colds and coughs, sore throats, 
swollen tonsils, anxiety and phobias,  
and impotence.
Growth disorders in children
SYMPTOMS  Delayed physical development in 
children, such as late development of speech 
and walking, possibly caused by Down 
syndrome. The genitals and other parts of the 
body may not develop properly , typically 
resulting in a large head and short stature.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For emotional stress.
Problems of the elderly
SYMPTOMS  Senile dementia with childish, 
confused, and embarrassing behavior. The 
short-term memory may be impaired, and 
paranoia or depression may develop. There 
may be hair loss. A frequent desire to urinate 
may progress eventually to incontinence. 
These symptoms may be associated with  
a stroke.Symptoms better  For not thinking  
about symptoms.
Symptoms worse  For emotional stress; 
for company.
Swollen tonsils
SYMPTOMS  A raw throat with inflamed 
tonsils and a burning pain on swallowing. 
There may be retching that is aggravated by 
swallowing solid foods. The neck glands may 
swell and harden, and there may be excess 
production of saliva. Symptoms may be 
indicative of mumps, especially in children.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for fresh air;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For extreme heat; for cold; for 
having damp feet; for thinking about symptoms.
Anxiety & phobias
SYMPTOMS  Intense, often irrational, fears and 
anxieties, possibly triggered by negative 
recollections of school days, or by memories 
of physical or sexual abuse. There is often a 
tendency to bite the nails.
Symptoms better  For walking alone in the open 
air; for not thinking about symptoms.
Symptoms worse  For emotional stress;  
for company.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  Recurrent colds, coughs, and 
bronchitis. The nostrils may feel dry and raw.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for fresh air;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For extreme heat; for cold; for 
having damp feet; for thinking about symptoms.
Impotence
SYMPTOMS  Bouts of erectile dysfunction or low 
libido in men, possibly so pronounced that they 
actually fall asleep during sexual intercourse.KEY SYMPTOMS physical, mental, and emotional immaturity • lack of confidence  
• swollen tonsils • offensive-smelling perspiration on the feet MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Barium chloride is precipitated with  
a weak solution of ammonia to form  
white, odorless crystals of  
barium carbonate.
BACKGROUND
Prescribed medicinally in Europe in the  
late 19th and early 20th centuries as  
a treatment for tuberculosis and  
glandular swelling.
PREPARATION
Once the crystals of barium carbonate have 
been chemically prepared, they are mixed 
with lactose sugar and triturated.
COMMON NAME
Barium carbonate.
See also Stroke,  page 187 ; Prostate problems,  page 202 ; Confusion,  page 266 ; Senile dementia,  page 266Symptoms better  For not thinking  
about symptoms.
Symptoms worse  For cold, for having damp 
feet; for emotional stress.BARIUM CARBONATE A powerful poison, this 
compound causes nausea and vomiting if 
consumed. It is used to make rat poison.
White crystals  
are odorless and toxicAlchemists in the 17th century gave barium the name lapis solaris , due to its 
luminous qualities when heated. Its compounds are used in radiology , although as 
a pure element barium is very poisonous. Commercially barium carbonate is used 
as a pottery glaze, and to make porcelain, glassware, and optical glass. Baryta 
carb., proved by Hahnemann and published in his Chronic Diseases  (1821–34), 
is prescribed mainly for problems in childhood and old age.

•77
CALC. CARB.Calcium carbonicum Hahnemanni
REMEDY PROFILE
Calc. carb.  is best suited to shy, placid, 
sensitive, contemplative people who may 
also have an agitated, excitable side,  
notably in the face of cruelty. Cautious  
and fearful worriers, they are calmed by 
reassurance. They are forgetful, lacking in 
energy, and inherently clumsy, often 
spraining ankles and wrists. Work and 
security are important.
As children, these individuals develop 
slowly, teething and walking later than the 
average age. Both adults and children may 
sweat heavily, mostly on the scalp, and have 
a sluggish circulation. There may be an 
aversion to meat, dairy foods, and coffee, 
and cravings for sweets, eggs, or indigestible 
things such as chalk or soap. They are 
prone to constipation and sour-smelling 
sweat, and may be sensitive to the cold. 
They are inclined to be overweight.
Calc. carb.  is prescribed for anxiety-related 
conditions, and for bone, joint, and dental 
problems, digestive disorders, headaches, and 
certain ailments affecting women’s health.
Anxiety & phobias
SYMPTOMS  Worry and fears that may escalate 
into obsessive behavior, mainly focusing 
around fears that other people will “see 
through them” and consider them unable  
to cope or fakes. Anxiety may be due to 
irrational fears, typically of darkness, poverty , 
illness, death, or failure. Worry and anxiety 
dreams may result in sleep being disrupted  
or prevented, leading to insomnia.
Symptoms better  For dry weather; in the late 
morning; after breakfast.
Symptoms worse  For cold weather; toward 
evening; for mental exertion; after eating.Bone & joint pain
SYMPTOMS  Backaches, bone growths, bunions, 
or joint pain, perhaps caused by an arthritic 
condition, an inflammatory joint problem 
such as tennis elbow, or a slow-mending 
sprain. Broken bones tend to be slow to heal.
Symptoms better  For lying on the affected 
side; in the late morning; for dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for sweating; 
for physical exertion; before menstruating.
Dental problems
SYMPTOMS  Painful teething in children, with 
sore gums, fever, and a sweaty scalp. The 
child is irritable and makes a chewing motion 
with the jaws. Calc. carb.  is also used for slow 
tooth development, weak, crumbly teeth, and 
dental decay in children and adults.
Symptoms better  For warm weather; for 
rubbing or lying on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For heat or cold in the mouth; 
for a direct current of air on the tooth.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion with flatulence, 
bloating, and sour belching, or constipation 
with sour-smelling, hard, pale stools. 
Symptoms may improve when accompanied 
by constipation. They are often triggered by 
anxiety and agitation  (see left) .
Symptoms better  In the late morning;  
after breakfast.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; on 
waking; for sweating; for physical exertion; 
before menstruating; for milk.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Sharp head pain, often right-sided, 
and possibly with dizziness, congestion, or 
catarrh. Migraines with nausea and bursting 
pain may develop.KEY SYMPTOMS fears and anxieties • delayed development • sour-smelling discharges 
• sensitivity to the cold • aversion to dairy products • cravings for sweets and eggs 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Secreted by oysters between the inner and 
outer layers of their shells. In this form it is 
commonly called mother-of-pearl.
BACKGROUND
Previously given as an antacid, and now 
used in dentistry, in making furniture  
and jewelry, and in the building and 
chemical industries.
PREPARATION
The shells are cleaned and dried, and the 
mother-of-pearl is removed from the outer 
shell. It is then triturated with lactose sugar.
COMMON NAMES
Calcium carbonate, oyster shell, mother-of-
pearl, carbonate of lime.
See also Respiration,  page 180 ; Palpitations,  page 186 ; Skin,  pages 192 , 194; Reproduction,  page 198 ; Immune system,  page 204MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
OYSTER SHELL  The homeopathic remedy calcium 
carbonate is made from oyster shells. The  
calcified remains of many crustaceans also 
contain calcium carbonate.
Symptoms better  In the late morning;  
for dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; before 
menstruating; in spring.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Burning vaginal itching, with a 
thick, yellow or white discharge, due to 
thrush. There may be heavy menstrual flow or 
premenstrual syndrome (PMS), possibly with 
low energy levels, enlarged, painful breasts, 
and dizziness. Menopausal symptoms may 
include breast pain and heavy bleeding.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest;  
for dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for exertion; for 
emotional stress.Oyster shells are the natural source of calcium carbonate used in this remedy , but the 
compound also occurs naturally in marble, chalk, pearls, limestone, and coral. It is 
one of several calcium salts used in homeopathy . The human body needs calcium to 
function efficiently , since various essential compounds are produced when it combines 
with protein in the body . Hahnemann proved the remedy , and published it in his 
Chronic Diseases  (1821–34).Mother-of-  
pearl forms  
as lining  
of shell

78•
Calcium phosphoricum
CALC. PHOS.
REMEDY PROFILE
Usually sociable and sensitive, people who 
respond best to Calc. phos.  are prone to feelings 
of great insecurity with regard to their health and 
friends. They may get depressed, worn down, 
and weary , feeling poorly nourished on both a 
physical and an emotional level. This feeling often 
leads them to be restless and uncertain of what 
they want. Constantly seeking new stimulation 
and contacts, they like to travel and meet people, 
but tend to feel dissatisfied, bored, and irritable 
without knowing why . As children, they exhibit 
similar discontent with no real cause.
Calc. phos.  is used to treat bone conditions 
such as joint disorders, fractures that are slow to 
heal, and slow growth in children. Teething 
problems and weak teeth are also treated with 
the remedy , as are fatigue, anemia (possibly  
after illness), migraines, and disorders of the 
digestive system.
Bone & joint conditions
SYMPTOMS  Pain and stiffness in the neck and 
back. Joints may be painful, possibly due to 
arthritis, inflamed tendons, slow healing of 
fractures, or ligament sprains. There may be 
abnormality of the bones in a joint, causing 
them to fuse and become immobile, or leading 
to curvature of the spine.
Symptoms better  In summer; for warm,  
dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
for worry or grief; for overexertion; for lifting  
heavy objects.
T eething
SYMPTOMS  Slow or difficult teething, typically 
with colds, coughs, and diarrhea. Once teeth 
have formed, they tend to be weak and  
decay easily .Symptoms better  In summer; for warm,  
dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather.
Fatigue
SYMPTOMS  General feeling of being 
undernourished and unwell. Weakness, 
exhaustion, and anemia may follow illness  
or emotional stress. There may also be 
susceptibility to the cold and to drafts.
Symptoms better  In summer; after a very  
hot bath.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
for worry or grief; for overexertion; for lifting  
heavy objects; for sexual excess.
Growth disorders
SYMPTOMS  Slow growth in children and 
adolescents, or rapid growth during  
puberty, typically accompanied by 
numbness and a crawling sensation in  
the hands and feet. The fontanelle may  
be slow to close in babies.
Symptoms better  For warm, dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
for puberty; during teeth development.
Head pain
SYMPTOMS  Severe headaches with pain  
along the cranial sutures (the joints linking the 
bones of the cranium). These may intensify  
into migraines.
Symptoms better  In summer; for warm,  
dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
for worry or grief; for overexertion; for lifting  
heavy objects.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion, pain after eating, and 
heartburn. Adults may find it difficult to eat and KEY SYMPTOMS discontentment • desire to travel • delayed or accelerated growth  
• craving for smoked meats • susceptibility to bone and tooth problems MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Manufactured from dilutions of phosphoric 
acid and calcium hydroxide (also called 
limewater). The two solutions react to  
form calcium phosphate as a cloudy,  
white precipitate.
BACKGROUND
Used in the manufacture of glass, in 
fertilizers, as a stabilizer in plastics, and  
as a leavening agent in baking. Additionally 
used by dentists as a polishing powder  
for teeth.
PREPARATION
The white calcium phosphate precipitate  
is ﬁltered, dried, and triturated with  
lactose sugar.
COMMON NAMES
Calcium phosphate, phosphate of lime.
See also Rosacea,  page 193 ; Rheumatoid arthritis,  page 197 ; Breast problems,  page 201 ; Phobias,  page 211be nourished by food, possibly due to cramps, 
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. There may  
be cravings for sweets, and for salty foods such 
as smoked meats. Children may have chronic 
abdominal pain. Babies have great difficulties 
feeding, persistently vomiting even breast  
milk, and suffering from cramps and colic  
after feeding.
Symptoms better  In summer; for warm,  
dry weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
for dwelling on symptoms; for drinking milk.In nature, the mineral salt calcium phosphate exists as apatite, found  
predominantly in north Africa. Calcium phosphate is the main constituent of  
bones and teeth, accounting for about 60 percent of the average human skeleton.  
Dr. Wilhelm Schüssler chose it in 1873 as one of the 12 mineral or tissue salts  
that he considered vital for a healthy body  (see page 90) . The remedy , proved by  
Dr. Constantine Hering in 1837, is given primarily for bone and tooth problems.CALCIUM PHOSPHATE  Although 
calcium phosphate exists in  
a natural state, it is  
manufactured in a  
laboratory for use  
in homeopathy.
Calcium phosphate 
forms as white 
precipitate when  
the two solutions  
are mixed

•79
CAUSTICUMCausticum Hahnemanni
REMEDY PROFILE
Those for whom Causticum  may be most helpful 
tend to be serious and introspective. They feel 
the effect of grief for prolonged periods and may 
become mentally weakened, absent-minded, 
hopeless, anxious, and prey to fears or fanciful 
ideas. Forgetfulness and a need to check on their 
fears and fancies can lead to a compulsive need 
to check and recheck everything they do. 
Acutely sympathetic to the sufferings of others, 
they tend to react strongly to others’ distress or 
to any perceived injustices; at best sympathetic 
and idealistic, they are often politically active.
These people frequently have a tendency to 
feel chilly and to be affected by changes in the 
weather, by cold, dry weather, and by getting 
wet. Causticum  is most often prescribed for 
weakness, which may progress to paralysis, of 
the nerves and muscles, especially of the 
bladder, larynx, vocal cords, upper eyelids, and 
the right side of the face. Muscle weakness may 
show both as twitching and as stiffness that 
causes mobility problems.
Tremors & paralysis
SYMPTOMS  Muscle weakness with tremors and 
drooping of the upper eyelids. There may be a 
stutter, particularly at times of anger or 
excitement, and dizziness accompanied by a lack 
of coordination. Facial neuralgia or paralysis 
(Bell’s palsy) is possible, especially on the right 
side, or there may be a form of slow-developing 
paralysis. Minor or severe seizures may occur, 
from petit mal fits to serious convulsions, with a 
susceptibility to jerking and twitching in 
extreme cases.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for washing.
Symptoms worse  For dry, cold winds; in the 
evening; for exertion.Urinary disorders
SYMPTOMS  Bed-wetting that may be long-
term in children, and urine incontinence in the 
elderly . A need to urinate frequently may be 
experienced, or the reverse, where urine is 
retained due to temporary paralysis. There may 
be stress incontinence on jarring the body—for 
example, when running, or when coughing, 
sneezing, or laughing. This is particularly 
prevalent in women during pregnancy and after 
giving birth. Cystitis, with a strong urge to 
urinate accompanied by an inability to actually 
do so, may also be treated by Causticum . Both 
men and women who respond to this remedy 
may experience a loss of sexual pleasure or an 
aversion to sexual intercourse.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for washing; for 
cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For dry, cold winds; in the 
evening; for coffee.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Large warts that may bleed easily on 
the hands, face, and fingertips, especially near 
the nails; scars that do not heal well; and  
slow-healing burns that blister. Boils, blisters, 
eczema, herpes, and acne may also be helped  
by the remedy .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for washing.
Symptoms worse  For dry, cold winds; in the 
evening; for exertion.
Sore throat
SYMPTOMS  A dry , raw , and burning throat with a 
constant need to swallow or to clear mucus from 
the throat, possibly with a choking sensation. 
The larynx and vocal cords may be inflamed and 
hoarse. Tightness and a tearing pain in the chest 
may be related to asthma.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for washing;  KEY SYMPTOMS oversensitivity • intolerance of injustice • gradual paralysis  
• raw, burning pain • person feels worse for cold, dry, windy weather 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Hahnemann used equal parts of slaked lime 
(calcium hydroxide) and sulfate of potash 
(potassium bisulfate) to make this remedy.
BACKGROUND
Created by Hahnemann, who wanted to 
produce a particularly caustic mixture,  
this compound was new to the medical 
repertory of the time.
PREPARATION
Slaked lime and sulfate of potash are 
combined and dissolved in puriﬁed water. 
This solution is then further diluted  
and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Potassium hydrate.
See also Multiple sclerosis,  page 179 ; Skin,  pages 192 , 242; Emotions,  page 210 ; Laryngitis,  page 228 ; Bed-wetting,  page 248MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For dry, cold winds; in the 
evening; for overusing the voice.
Cough
SYMPTOMS  A dry , deep cough that racks the 
chest, with a persistent tickle in the throat and 
difficulty coughing hard enough to bring  
up mucus.
Symptoms better  For warm, moist weather;  
for warmth in bed; for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For dry, cold winds; in the 
evening; for exertion.Unique to homeopathy , this compound of potassium was specially devised  
and proved by Hahnemann, who published it in his Chronic Diseases  
(1821–34). Hahnemann noted that the compound caused an astringent 
sensation and a burning taste on the tongue. Interestingly , Causticum  is a 
major homeopathic first-aid remedy for severe burns, and a remedy for 
pain with a burning sensation. Other ailments for which it is taken  
include local paralysis, incontinence, sore throats, and coughs.POTASSIUM HYDRATE   
This compound is not  
used in any form  
of medicine  
other than 
homeopathy.

80•80•
Cuprum metallicum
CUPRUM MET.
REMEDY PROFILE
Emotions tend to be both rigidly suppressed and 
intensely felt in those for whom Cuprum met . is 
best suited. Adolescents may suppress their 
sexual urges as being too strong to cope with, so 
that any later release of tension may appear 
extreme. Psychological contrasts can also be 
extreme, ranging from yielding to headstrong, or 
from closed-down mental dullness to destructive 
anger or even violent insanity .
T ypical physical symptoms include a pale, 
drawn face, with blue lips and cold hands and 
feet. Symptoms may be violent, becoming worse 
if menstruation is late, or if any eruptions and 
bodily discharges are suppressed by medication, 
being chilled, or getting wet.
The remedy is associated primarily with 
problems of the nervous, respiratory , and 
digestive systems. Cramping, which may be 
extreme, may affect the fingers, toes, legs, and 
stomach. A common feature is exhaustion, 
perhaps following illness, lack of sleep, or 
exhausting mental strain.
Cramps, convulsions & epilepsy
SYMPTOMS  The muscles feel knotted up, 
particularly in the legs, feet, and calves. Cramps 
and muscle spasms appear in the limbs, 
especially at night. They start with twitching and 
jerking in the toes, and then spread farther up 
the feet, ankles, and calves. Other symptoms are 
cold extremities, blue lips, and facial grimacing.
Muscle spasms may be marked in pregnancy 
and after childbirth. Extreme cramps or 
convulsions may occasionally be triggered. 
Young children may exhibit great anger or 
teething problems. Muscle spasms and 
convulsions linked to epilepsy may be violent, starting in the fingers and toes and spreading  
to the center of the body . There may be rashes 
and perspiration on the feet that is worse if 
suppressed—for example, by chilling the feet.
Symptoms better  For perspiring; for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; at night; for 
touch; for suppressing emotions; for suppressing 
sweats and rashes.
Coughs & asthma
SYMPTOMS  Long, spasmodic, violent coughing 
fits, possibly associated with whooping cough. 
Breathing is labored, rapid, and may seem to 
stop during coughing fits. The face may be pale, 
with blue lips and a metallic taste in the mouth.
Symptoms better  For perspiring; for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for cold air; for 
touch; for vomiting; for suppressing emotions.
Abdominal cramps
SYMPTOMS  Spasmodic, often violent, colicky pain, 
possibly with nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. The 
abdomen is hot, tender, and sore, and there is a 
blue line at the margin of the gums, and a 
metallic taste in the mouth. A gurgling sound  
on drinking may be due to a spasm of the 
esophagus. Exhaustion may follow  (see below) , 
with loss of appetite. Cuprum met . is also used 
for nausea associated with cholera.
Symptoms better  For perspiring; for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for touch; for 
vomiting; for suppressing emotions.
Exhaustion
SYMPTOMS  Fatigue following hard work, lack of 
sleep, or restless sleep. There may be cramps 
and headaches between the eyes. Exhaustion 
may also be the result of abdominal cramps and 
vomiting  (see left) .KEY SYMPTOMS spasms and cramps • suppression of emotions • ailments that are 
triggered by suppression of rashes and discharges • person feels better for cold drinks MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Deposited worldwide in rocks, and mined in 
many countries, such as Chile. Copper has 
many uses and can be alloyed to form 
harder metals such as bronze.
BACKGROUND
The ﬁrst metal to be utilized for tools, and 
also an essential trace element in many 
foods, vital for maintaining a healthy body 
and for good bone growth.
PREPARATION
The metal is triturated with lactose sugar, 
then ground repeatedly until it forms a 
powder ﬁne enough to be soluble in water.  
It is then ﬁltered, diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Copper.
See also Cramps,  page 230Symptoms better  For perspiring.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for  
emotional stress; for suppressing sweats  
and rashes; during pregnancy.Copper’s name is derived from the Greek Kupris , or Cyprus, after the island on which 
the ancient Greeks found the metal. Although used as late as the 1880s by doctors in 
ointments for healing wounds, coppersmiths have long known of copper’s toxic 
nature. Chronic copper poisoning produces symptoms such as coughs, colic, diarrhea, 
and difficulty in assimilating food. Acute copper poisoning can cause convulsions, 
paralysis, and even death. These factors suggested to Hahnemann, who proved 
Cuprum met . in 1834, the remedy’s strong affinity with similar symptoms.
COPPER  Deposits of this reddish-brown mineral  
are found as massive or thin sheets of copper.POWDERED 
COPPERCOPPER
Thin, branchlike  
sheets may form  
between plates of rock

•81
FERRUM MET.Ferrum metallicum
REMEDY PROFILE
Emotional traits that indicate a need for 
Ferrum met . include moodiness, nervous 
irritability , sensitivity , and an intolerance of 
contradiction. A compulsion to do certain 
tasks may lead to feelings of failure, 
restlessness, and neglected duty . This sense of 
compulsion easily turns into its opposite: 
extreme fatigue, weakness, and depression.
T ypical physical symptoms include pale lips 
and face, a tendency to flush easily , and a rosy 
look that suggests good health but is actually 
caused by poor circulation. Perspiration may 
be cold, clammy , and profuse. Bouts of 
dizziness may occur, as well as sensitivity to 
cold and to noise. Mental and physical activity 
are subject to weakness and severe fatigue. 
Circulatory and digestive problems frequently 
occur, possibly with marked appetite loss. 
Movement may be painful and difficult due to 
back, joint, and head pain.
Anemia
SYMPTOMS  Pale face that flushes easily , and pale 
lips, with great fatigue  (see below) . Ferrum  
met. is given for anemia from blood loss,  
often due to heavy periods or problems  
in pregnancy .
Symptoms better  In summer; for gentle 
movement.
Symptoms worse  For violent exertion; during 
menstruation.
Severe fatigue
SYMPTOMS  Extreme physical and mental fatigue, 
the latter causing great sensitivity to noise. There 
is no desire to work, but a need to lie down.
Symptoms better  For walking slowly in fresh air.Symptoms worse  At night; for violent exertion; for 
emotional stress; for loss of bodily fluids.
Circulatory problems
SYMPTOMS  Painful varicose veins, particularly in 
pregnancy . There may be hemorrhages such as 
nosebleeds, especially in children. Throbbing 
blood vessels with headaches are also possible, 
as are neuralgic pains  (see right) , hot flashes, 
fever, or palpitations, aggravated by heat.
Symptoms better  For gentle movement.
Symptoms worse  For heat; at night; for lying 
down; for loss of bodily fluids.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Nausea brought on by eating, which 
causes a reluctance to eat. There may be sudden 
vomiting, either while eating or hours later, at 
around midnight. T ypical symptoms include 
constipation or cramping pains in the stomach 
or abdomen. The digestion is weak, with an 
intolerance of eggs and fatty foods. Teething 
children may develop diarrhea while eating. 
Ferrum met . can also be used to treat post-
operative nausea.
Symptoms better  For gentle movement.
Symptoms worse  At night; for eating; for eggs; 
for fatty foods.
Back & joint pain
SYMPTOMS  Stiffness of the lower back  
and neck, sciatica, arthritis, especially  
in the shoulders, and painful daytime 
cramps and coldness in the feet. Despite 
fatigue and an aversion to brisk movement, 
pain or restlessness causes a compulsion  
to keep moving.
Symptoms better  For gentle movement; for 
walking slowly.KEY SYMPTOMS chilliness • intolerance of noise and contradiction • intolerance of eggs  
and fatty foods • tendency to flush easily • person feels better for gentle movement 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
From iron ores such as hematite, found in 
Canada, the US, and Venezuela. Iron is the 
second most common metal on Earth.
BACKGROUND
So prominent in history that it gave its  
name to the Iron Age, and also a highly 
important trace element for the working  
of the human body.
PREPARATION
Powdered iron is ground with lactose sugar 
to triturate it. It is then dissolved in water, 
and repeatedly diluted and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Iron.
See also Chronic fatigue syndrome,  page 204 ; Headaches,  page 218 ; Varicose veins,  page 230 ; Nausea & vomiting,  page 236MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
Symptoms worse  At night; for beginning  
to move.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Throbbing pains in the forehead, 
often lasting for several days, with possible 
dizziness and scalp pain.
Symptoms better  For lying down; for firm 
pressure on the affected part of the head.
Symptoms worse  For going down steps;  
for writing; prior to menstruation;  
for stooping.Iron is essential in the body for the formation of hemoglobin, the  
oxygen-carrying substance in red blood cells. A diet deficient in iron or  
an inability to absorb iron into the body can lead to anemia, fatigue,  
and breathlessness. Ferrum met . was probably proved and published by 
Hahnemann between 1821 and 1834. It is prescribed to help the body cope 
with anemia caused by blood loss, and is thought by some to help the body 
absorb iron more efficiently .
HAEMATITE  This opaque mineral is the most 
important source of iron ore, containing up to  
70 percent iron.Hematite often 
forms as kidney 
ore, so called 
because of  
its shape

82•
Ferrum phosphoricum
FERRUM PHOS.
REMEDY PROFILE
Ferrum phos.  is most suited to alert, sociable, 
open-natured people who are sensitive and 
sympathetic, but who like to take action  
if something has upset them, particularly  
where protecting their family is concerned. 
Often overexcited and talkative, they may  
have difficulty concentrating. While their 
temperament is generally imaginative, cheerful 
and lively , it may alternate rapidly with an 
indifferent, depressed state.
Ferrum phos.  may be given for the early 
stages of infection, respiratory problems, 
earaches, fevers, and digestive, circulatory ,  
and urogenital disorders.
Fever
SYMPTOMS  Slow-developing fever with hot 
flashes, excessive perspiration, intense thirst, and 
areas of acute inflammation.
Symptoms better  For cold; for pressure on the 
inflamed area; for being left alone.
Symptoms worse  At night; before starting to 
perspire; for physical exertion.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  A slow-developing cold, possibly with 
a nosebleed and dry , hacking cough, often with 
chest pain. There may be hoarseness and a sore 
throat, typical of laryngitis. Other symptoms 
may include short, panting breaths, possibly  
due to pneumonia or pleurisy .
Symptoms better  For gentle exercise;  
for cold compresses.
Symptoms worse  At night; from 4 a.m. to 6 a.m.; 
before starting to perspire; for physical exertion.
Earache
SYMPTOMS  Pain and itching in the ear, possibly 
with hearing loss. Pain may be one-sided.Symptoms better  For cold; for pressure on  
the ear.
Symptoms worse  At night;  
for physical exertion.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion, sour burps, and 
vomiting of food that seems not to have 
been digested. T ypically there is poor 
appetite and an intense thirst. There may  
be diarrhea that has a tendency to recur 
during the summer, or that may be linked 
to irritable bowel syndrome. Another 
possible symptom for which Ferrum phos.  
may be given is constipation, particularly  
if accompanied by hemorrhoids. Blood  
in the stools may indicate the initial  
stages of dysentery.
Symptoms better  For taking gentle exercise.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for sun; for 
jarring; for movement; at night; for cold 
drinks; for sour foods.
Poor circulation
SYMPTOMS  Varicose veins, hemorrhages, and 
nosebleeds with bright red blood, and a weak, 
rapid pulse. The face tends to flush easily . There 
may be weakness and pallor, possibly  
indicating anemia.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for jarring;  
for movement.
Raynaud’s disease
SYMPTOMS  Fingers and toes are white, cold, 
numb, tingling, and burning, due to restricted 
blood flow when blood vessels contract in the 
cold. As the blood flow is restored, the fingers 
turn blue, then red.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the fingers; for 
walking at a slow pace.KEY SYMPTOMS colds accompanied by temporary deafness • conditions that  
appear gradually • hot flashes • pale face that flushes easily MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Chemically prepared for the manufacture of 
homeopathic remedies, although vivianite is 
a natural source of iron phosphate.
BACKGROUND
Used by Dr. Wilhelm Schüssler to make a 
“biochemic tissue salt” for treating the early 
stages of inﬂammatory conditions.
PREPARATION
Prepared chemically from iron sulfate, 
sodium phosphate, and sodium acetate.  
The powdered mineral is then triturated.
COMMON NAME
Iron phosphate.
See also Colds,  page 224Symptoms worse  For cold air; for jarring  
the fingers.
Urogenital problems
SYMPTOMS  A short menstrual cycle, or possibly  
a dry vagina, dragging uterine pain, and 
nocturnal stress incontinence in women, or  
a marked loss of libido in men.
Symptoms better  For gentle exercise.
Symptoms worse  During the night; for touch.Made from iron phosphate,  Ferrum phos . is one of Dr. Wilhelm Schüssler’s “biochemic 
tissue salts,” thought to counter deficiencies in the body  (see page 90) . This German 
homeopath believed that the remedy strengthened the blood vessel walls, restoring 
normal blood flow in cases of acute inflammation, hemorrhaging, or congestion.  
Dr. J. C. Morgan proved the remedy in 1876. It is given for the initial stages  
of infections and for inflammatory conditions.IRON PHOSPHATE This compound is commonly 
found in fossilized bones, and also in human 
muscle tissue.
Slate-blue 
powder is 
soluble in water

•83
GRAPHITESGraphites
REMEDY PROFILE
Those who respond best to Graphites  tend 
to be more physically than intellectually 
oriented. These practical types prefer action 
to discussion, and are seen as “the ones who 
are going to cope.” They can, however, be 
lethargic, notably on waking. Seemingly 
moody, pessimistic, and agitated, under the 
surface they are deeply emotional, often sad, 
and easily moved to tears by music.
These people are especially susceptible to 
certain physical symptoms affecting the skin, 
nails, mucous membranes, and the left side of 
the body . Symptoms are often linked to 
glandular problems. Sensitivity to the cold 
and headaches after skipping meals  
are typical.
Skin & nail conditions
SYMPTOMS  Irritated, cracked, dry skin behind 
the ears, and on the nostrils, knees, nipples, 
and fingertips. Eczema or psoriasis may 
ooze a honey-colored discharge. Cracked 
skin may bleed and easily become infected. 
There may be old scars that ulcerate and 
burn, cold sores around the mouth, and 
herpes blisters around the genitals.
Symptoms better  For warmth with fresh air; in 
the dark; for sleep; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold; during menstruation; 
for sweet foods; for seafood.
Anxiety & shyness
SYMPTOMS  Self-doubt, lack of self-
confidence, shyness, and indecision.  
There is a tendency to anticipate the worst, 
to be full of anxiety, and to become upset 
over the slightest thing, which frequently 
causes depression or overexcitement. 
Concentration may be poor, and may even develop into dementia. Fastidiousness  
and perfectionism are further common 
Graphites  traits.
Symptoms better  For walking in fresh air; for 
the dark; for being in a moving vehicle.
Symptoms worse  On waking; for music;  
during menstruation.
Eye, ear & nose conditions
SYMPTOMS  Swollen, red, dry eyelids due  
to blepharitis, and styes with a yellow 
discharge. There may be an ear discharge 
with an itchy infection of the outer ear. A 
cracking sound, especially while eating, may 
occur, as may deafness related to 
otosclerosis (a middle-ear disorder). Hot 
sweats (often due to a hormonal imbalance) 
may be followed by nosebleeds.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for fresh air.
Symptoms worse  For cold; on the left side; 
before and during menstruation.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Constipation, bloating, and 
flatulence, maybe with cramps. There may 
be rectal itching, hemorrhoids, anal fissures, 
and stomach pains with hunger or vomiting. 
Bland foods are preferred to meat and salty 
or sweet foods.
Symptoms better  For warmth with fresh air;  
for hot foods.
Symptoms worse  For cold; during menstruation; 
for sweet foods; for seafood.
Menstrual problems
SYMPTOMS  Irregular, scanty , menstruation, and 
swollen, hard, painful breasts before and 
during menstruation. There may be itchy 
genitals and constipation  (see above) .
Symptoms better  For wrapping up warmly.
Symptoms worse  At night; for scratching.KEY SYMPTOMS poor concentration • indecisiveness • conditions that mainly affect the left 
side • weeping on hearing music • chilliness • cracked skin with a honeylike discharge 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Forms within other rocks, such as granite, 
slate, schist, and marble. Commonly found 
in Sri Lanka, Mexico, and North America.
BACKGROUND
Dr. S. Weinhold, a German contemporary of 
Hahnemann, noted that workmen in a mirror 
factory cured cold sores with graphite.
PREPARATION
Graphite powder is triturated with lactose 
sugar to make it soluble. After being 
dissolved in water it is repeatedly diluted 
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Graphite, blacklead, plumbago.
See also Eczema,  pages 194,  240; Reproduction,  page 198; Emotional problems,  page 210; Catarrh,  page 226MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
Erectile problems
SYMPTOMS  Impotence in men with a high 
libido at an early age. Priapism (persistent, 
sore erection) may affect men who dislike 
sexual intercourse.
Symptoms better  For walking in fresh air.
Symptoms worse  For sexual excess;  
for masturbation.Graphite is a carbon mineral that contains traces of iron. The name derives from 
the Greek graphein, meaning “to write.” The main constituent of pencil lead, 
graphite is also used in the production of lubricants, polishes, batteries, and 
electric motors. The remedy , proved by Hahnemann and published in his Chronic 
Diseases  (1821–34), is often given for skin complaints and for anxiety with lack  
of confidence.
GRAPHITE This mineral is not generally used 
medicinally, except in its homeopathic form.GRAPHITE 
POWDER
GRAPHITE ROCK
Graphite is  
a soft rock

84•84•
Hepar sulphuris calcareum
HEPAR SULPH.
REMEDY PROFILE
People who respond best to Hepar sulph.  are 
touchy , both mentally and physically . They are 
patient and methodical workers, but this 
tolerance does not extend to others, and they 
are often critical, irritable, and hard to please. 
They are also oversensitive and quick to take 
offense. Illness heightens their irritability and 
impetuosity , and anger, pain, or anguish may 
drive them to violent outbursts. They may 
have low self-esteem and feel as though they 
are rejected by others.
Often hypersensitive, these people tend to 
have a low pain threshold and to complain 
out of proportion to their illness. They lack 
internal warmth, and will feel the cold keenly , 
especially dry cold. Symptoms are usually 
worse at night, and aggravated by the least 
touch on the affected area. Common cravings 
are for fatty foods and for sour tastes such  
as vinegar.
Hepar sulph.  is generally used where there is 
an infection, particularly in the respiratory 
system or skin. It is especially appropriate for 
ailments that are accompanied by swollen 
glands, particularly in the neck or groin, or if 
there is a high fever alternating with chills.
Colds & catarrh
SYMPTOMS  Cold or influenza with fever, 
sneezing, sweating, and need for warmth. 
Profuse catarrh may be watery at first, then 
blood-stained, thick, and yellowish in color, 
with a smell of old cheese. Contact with cold 
air triggers sneezing. The nostrils may feel 
sore and raw. Colds may begin with a tickly 
throat  (see right) . There may be sinusitis, with 
pain in the facial bones and the bridge of the 
nose. Pain is often right-sided and extends to 
the ear, notably on swallowing. There may be a piercing earache with a foul-smelling  
ear discharge.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for warm, wet 
weather; for covering the head; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold and cold drafts; for 
touch; for undressing.
Sore throat
SYMPTOMS  A hoarse voice, sore throat, and 
swollen tonsils, often due to a cough  (see 
below)  or quinsy (abscesses around the 
tonsils). There may be weeping abscesses on 
the gums or glands, with sharp, splinterlike 
pain, especially on swallowing, that may 
spread to the ear.
Symptoms better  For warm, wet weather;  
for wrapping the throat; for warm compresses.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touching the 
throat; for swallowing; for cold drinks.
Coughs & croup
SYMPTOMS  A dry , hacking, crowing cough, 
often causing a sore throat (see above) . If  
the cough is loose, a coughing fit may be 
triggered by touching the throat, and may 
cause a choking feeling. Thick phlegm may  
be lodged in the chest. Coughs tend to be dry 
in the evening and loose in the morning.  
The symptoms of croup are similar, but  
with a barking cough and difficulty  
coughing up phlegm.
Symptoms better  For warm, wet weather;  
for wrapping up warmly.
Symptoms worse  For cold; in the morning and 
evening; for touching the throat.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  The skin chaps or roughens easily , 
and eruptions such as acne are inflamed and 
sore, with foul-smelling, yellow pus. 
Eruptions are slow to heal and prone to KEY SYMPTOMS violent outbursts • oversensitivity • chilliness • offensive-smelling 
discharges • splinterlike pains • craving for sour foods and drinks MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
A form of calcium sulﬁde using powdered 
oyster shell ( see page 77 ) and ﬂowers of 
sulfur ( see page 99 ).
BACKGROUND
Used by 18th-century doctors for goiter, 
gout, rheumatic pain, and tuberculosis.
PREPARATION
Flowers of sulfur and powdered oyster shell 
are heated, dissolved in acid, and triturated 
with lactose sugar.
COMMON NAMES
Calcium sulﬁde, crude calcium sulﬁde, 
sulfuret of lime.
See also  Eczema,  pages 194 , 240; Earaches,  page 222 ; Sinusitis,  page 226 ; Mild acne,  page 240 ; Tonsillitis,  page 250 ; Croup,  page 250infection, perhaps leaving scars. Infections 
such as styes, boils, and cold sores may be 
accompanied by the typical yellow discharge. 
Abscesses and ulcers bleed easily .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for warm 
compresses on the affected areas; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for undressing;  
for touch.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Nausea, vomiting, or chronic 
diarrhea, usually accompanied by a 
grumbling abdomen. Stools are typically pale, 
soft, and have a sour odor, as does urine.
Symptoms better  For warm, wet weather;  
for warmth; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for undressing.Doctors in the 18th century used calcium sulfide externally for ailments such as 
acne, boils, and gout. It is still used in veterinary medicine, and industrially in paint 
manufacture. The homeopathic remedy was first used by Hahnemann in 1794, as an 
antidote to the side-effects of mercury , a common medicine at the time  (see page 85) . 
Hepar sulph.  is now given primarily for respiratory problems such as croup and 
coughs, and for skin infections.CALCIUM SULFIDE  Hahnemann developed his own 
form of calcium sulfide using flowers of sulfur and 
powdered oyster shell instead of ordinary lime.OYSTER  
SHELL
POWDERED 
OYSTER SHELLFLOWERS  
OF SULFUR

•85
MERC. SOL.Hydrargyrum metallicum syn. Mercurius solubilis Hahnemanni
REMEDY PROFILE
People who benefit most from Merc. sol.  are 
anxious and restless. A need for stability and 
order gives them a conservative facade. In trying 
to restrain an inner sense of urgency , they 
become insecure, introverted, and suspicious, 
appearing detached and even arrogant in their 
dealings with people. They bottle up feelings of 
conflict until they explode in a blind rage. If 
unwell, they slow down in mind and body , but 
never lose their inner sense of restlessness. 
Illness may bring on confusion, a weak memory , 
hesitant speech, and weepiness. Constant 
hunger is typical, with cravings for bread, butter, 
and cold drinks such as milk or beer, but 
aversions to other alcoholic drinks, coffee, meat, 
and sweet foods.
T ypical physical symptoms include abscesses, 
ulcers, fever, swollen glands, and copious 
sweating. Bodily discharges, such as sweat, 
saliva, urine, and stools, are often foul-smelling. 
Symptoms are worse at night, and are 
aggravated by extremes of heat or cold 
(moderate temperatures are necessary for 
recovery). Excessive salivation is common,  
as is constant swallowing and dribbling on  
the pillow at night.
Mouth & throat conditions
SYMPTOMS  Mouth ulcers on the tongue, walls of 
the mouth, and gums. Sore, raised, cream-
colored patches may form in the mouth, usually 
indicating oral thrush. A sore throat may 
become ulcerated, and tonsillitis may set in. 
Abscesses may form in the roots of the teeth, 
causing painful swelling. Gums may become 
painfully inflamed and prone to bleeding 
(gingivitis). The teeth may also ache and loosen. 
Pain brought on by a toothache or a sore throat 
may extend to the ears. Other typical symptoms treated by Merc. sol.  include a bitter taste in  
the mouth, halitosis, swollen glands, fever   
(see below) , and a yellow-coated tongue that  
may bear tooth marks.
Symptoms better  For rest; for moderate 
temperatures; for applying warm compresses.
Symptoms worse  For extreme heat or cold;  
for sweating; for hot or cold foods and drinks.
Catarrh & colds
SYMPTOMS  Watery , yellow or greenish catarrh  
that has a foul, strong odor, with constant 
sneezing, and a raw , burning sensation in the 
nose. Chills, aches, fever  (see below) , and 
influenza are accompanied by a bitter-tasting 
mouth, a headache, and a sore throat  (see below , 
left). Pain in the sinuses may extend to the teeth  
(see below , left ) and ears  (see below) .
Symptoms better  For rest; for  
moderate temperatures.
Symptoms worse  For extreme heat or cold;  
for lying on the right side; for sweating.
Eye & ear infections
SYMPTOMS  Light-sensitive, swollen, watery , or 
inflamed eyes that exude a nasty yellow , 
greenish, or blood-flecked discharge, which may 
be due to conjunctivitis. Merc. sol.  is also used 
for ear pains with a thick, yellowy green,  
bloody , and foul-smelling discharge.
Symptoms better  For rest; for  
moderate temperatures.
Symptoms worse  For extreme heat or cold; at 
night; for stooping; for touch.
Fever
SYMPTOMS  High temperature with profuse, 
offensive-smelling perspiration that chills the 
skin. The fever often occurs with swollen glands, 
neuralgic pain, and a viselike headache.
Symptoms better  For rest; for  KEY SYMPTOMS foul-smelling discharges • reserved, suspicious state of mind • insecurity  
• copious perspiration that does not relieve conditions • person feels worse at night 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Deposits are extracted from cinnabar, found 
near volcanic vents and hot springs in 
Spain, Italy, the US, Peru, and China.
BACKGROUND
Advocated by Paracelsus, 16th-century 
scientist, and used medicinally for centuries: 
Charles II and George Washington were both 
prescribed it.
PREPARATION
Mercury is dissolved in nitric acid, forming a 
gray powder precipitate. This is then ﬁltered, 
dried, and triturated until soluble.
COMMON NAMES
Mercury, quicksilver, black oxide of mercury, 
ammonio-nitrate of mercury. Many different 
mercury preparations are available.
See also  Pneumonia,  page 183 ; Osteoarthritis,  page 196 ; Mouth,  page 232 ; Children’s health,  page 246MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
moderate temperatures.
Symptoms worse  For changes in temperature;  
for intense heat; for sweating; at night; for lying 
on the right side.
Thrush
SYMPTOMS  Itchy , burning vaginal discharge in 
women, and itchy , red spots on the penis in 
men, with a discharge.
Symptoms better  For bathing in cool water;  
for rest.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for humidity.Egyptian papyri dating from 1600 BCE record the early medicinal use of mercury , 
which later spread to the Greeks, Romans, and Arabs. Its use persisted through to 
1900 in the West as an aggressive treatment for syphilis and other diseases, until 
its toxic effects were deemed too dangerous. Merc. sol.  was proved by Hahnemann 
and published in his Materia Medica Pura  (1821–34). It is given primarily for 
ulcers, glandular problems, and offensive-smelling discharges.MERCURY  This mineral  
often forms as a liquid  
in volcanic rocks  
such as cinnabar.MERCURY DEPOSIT 
IN CLOSE-UP
CINNABAR

86•
Iodum
IODUM
REMEDY PROFILE
Those for whom Iodum  is most suitable are 
talkative, with a marked mental restlessness 
and irritability due to anxiety , and sudden 
urges to engage in exhausting activities. Their 
behavior is obsessive, with a compulsion to 
keep frantically busy , yet in a disorganized, 
forgetful way . Despite causing physical and 
mental fatigue, this frenzy is preferable to 
inactivity , when frightening thoughts  
heighten anxiety .
Iodum  is given for symptoms caused by an 
overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) 
and the accelerated metabolism it causes. 
Psychological symptoms may include eating 
disorders and anxiety that may manifest as 
violent rages if meals are not ready as soon as 
hunger is felt.
Physical symptoms include protruding eyes 
and eye pain linked with hyperthyroidism; 
nausea with a clean tongue and excess 
salivation, great thirst, respiratory problems, 
enlarged glands, and excessive sweating. 
These people tend to feel the heat and 
constantly try to keep cool, preferring cool 
clothing and finding warm surroundings 
uncomfortable.
Overactive metabolism
SYMPTOMS  Staring eyes (exophthalmos) and  
a distressed expression on the face, which 
may be swollen. The skin and hair are 
usually dry. There may be vertigo, with hot 
flashes, fainting, and throbbing head pain 
with a rush of blood to the head. Other 
symptoms include an increased appetite yet 
a noticeable weight loss  (see right)  and overheating  (see below, right) . Symptoms  
may be linked to hyperthyroidism.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for movement; 
for eating.
Symptoms worse  For warm surroundings.
Eating disorders
SYMPTOMS  Rapid, noticeable weight loss and 
emaciation despite an insatiable appetite.  
Excessive thirst is typical. The liver may 
become enlarged, with possible signs of 
jaundice, and the pancreas may be painful. 
Chronic diarrhea linked to nervousness or 
to particular foods may be present, as may 
constipation with pale stools.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for movement; 
for eating.
Symptoms worse  For warm surroundings;  
for anxiety.
Cough
SYMPTOMS  Dry, spasmodic, choking cough, 
possibly with gagging, retching, or 
vomiting. There may be copious mucus  
and a rattling sound in the chest, but no 
expectoration if symptoms are due to 
asthma or pneumonia. Children with this 
cough may become stiff, pale, or blue.
Symptoms better  For fresh air.
Symptoms worse  For warm surroundings;  
for overeating; for cold nights after hot days.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  Profuse, watery, excoriating 
catarrh in the nose, possibly with hay fever, 
or a dry, obstructed nose with enlargement 
of the adenoids. Asthma with hay fever may 
also be helped by Iodum .KEY SYMPTOMS loss of weight with increased appetite • heat intolerance • lack  
of thirst • enlarged glands that then waste away • anxiety and restlessness MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Once extracted from slowly burned seaweed, 
but now generally prepared chemically by 
industrial processes.
BACKGROUND
Chinese herbalists used burned seaweed to 
treat thyroid problems 2,000 years ago. It is 
also a well-known antiseptic.
PREPARATION
The remedy is made by dissolving iodate 
salts in alcohol, then repeatedly diluting and 
succussing the mixture.
COMMON NAME
Iodine.
See also Rheumatoid arthritis,  page 197 ; Prostate problems,  page 202 ; Blockage of the eustachian tube,  page 222Symptoms better  For fresh air; for movement; 
for eating.
Symptoms worse  For warm surroundings.
Heat intolerance
SYMPTOMS  Physical distress and feverishness in 
warm surroundings. The slightest physical 
activity may cause marked sweating.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for cool 
surroundings; for cool clothing.
Symptoms worse  For warm surroundings.Iodine is essential for the proper functioning of the thyroid gland.  
A deficiency of iodine produces symptoms such as weak muscles, 
weight loss, mental sluggishness, and fatigue. The condition is rare in 
the West because potassium iodide, a salt of iodine, is added to table 
salt. The homeopathic remedy , proved in 1837 by Hahnemann (in 
association with Drs. Trinks, Gross, Gerdorff, and Hartlaub) is used 
mainly to treat the many symptoms associated with an overactive 
thyroid gland and the accelerated metabolism it produces.
IODINE  This bluish-black element is commonly  
used in medicine, in photography, and in dyes.Granules are 
heavy and slightly 
soluble in water

•87
KALI. BICH.Kalium bichromicum
REMEDY PROFILE
People who benefit most from Kali. bich.  tend 
to have regular habits and like to go into great 
detail about even minor issues. They often 
have quite a black-and-white view of the 
world, and a strong sense of morality .
The symptoms may include pain in 
localized areas, and joint pain alternating  
with diarrhea in summer. There is generally  
a desire for beer and possibly a sensation as  
if there is a hair on the tongue.
Kali. bich.  is considered to have a beneficial 
effect on the mucous membranes, and is  
prescribed for respiratory-tract ailments 
marked by excessive catarrh. It is also given 
for indigestion, headaches, and joint pain, and 
for skin conditions with discharges, such as 
ulcers and acne with burning pains. 
Catarrh & sinusitis
SYMPTOMS  Constant yellow-green catarrh that is 
stringy or slimy and proves difficult to expel. At 
night, catarrh may accumulate in the nose or 
run down the back of the throat. The catarrh 
may sometimes become dry and hard. The 
sinuses are inflamed, and there is sharp pain at 
the bridge of the nose. Glue ear may develop, 
marked by earache and a thick, yellow discharge 
from the affected ear. Catarrh that becomes 
blocked in the nose may cause a headache  (see 
right) , possibly with vomiting.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for lying in a 
warm bed; for firm pressure on the bridge of 
the nose; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for stooping; in the 
morning; in the spring and fall.
Sore throat, coughs & croup
SYMPTOMS  The throat and tonsils are swollen. 
A tickle in the throat develops into a dry , hoarse cough. Stringy mucus lines the larynx and is 
hard to expel. Chest pains may spread to the 
back and shoulders. There may be a dry mouth, 
painful mouth ulcers, and a yellow tongue, 
possibly with digestive problems  (see below) .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for balmy days; 
for lying in a warm bed; for movement; for 
expelling mucus; at night.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; in  
the morning; in the spring and fall;  
for breathing deeply.
Indigestion
SYMPTOMS  Sharp, knifelike pains that radiate 
to the loins, and a sore spot in the stomach 
as if an ulcer has developed there. There may 
be an impression that the digestive processes 
have stopped, with a heavy feeling in the 
abdomen immediately after eating. An 
aversion to meat is a common symptom, as  
is a craving for beer, but drinking beer often 
causes vomiting and diarrhea.
Symptoms better  For passing gas; for belching.
Symptoms worse  For cold; in the spring and 
fall; for rich, heavy foods; for beer.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Pain at the same time each day. 
Localized pain may extend slowly across  
the whole head, possibly due to sinusitis  
(see left) . The onset of a migraine is marked 
by dim and blurred vision. There may be 
nausea, and stringy mucus may be present  
in the throat.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for firm pressure 
on the bridge of the nose.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for bending over.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Facial acne that causes small, solid, 
red bumps producing a yellow discharge. KEY SYMPTOMS great attention to detail • regular habits • localized pain • tough, 
stringy, yellow-green catarrh • person feels worse between 2 a.m. and 5 a.m. 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Does not occur in nature, so generally made 
chemically by combining neutral yellow 
potassium chromate with hydrochloric acid.
BACKGROUND
Used for industrial purposes such as the 
dyeing of fabric and wood-staining. Also 
used in photography, and as a component  
of electric batteries.
PREPARATION
Potassium dichromate crystals are ﬁnely 
ground (triturated) with lactose sugar until 
soluble in water. They are then ﬁltered, 
diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Potassium dichromate, potassium 
bichromate, bichromate of potash.
See also Rheumatoid arthritis,  page 197 ; Sinusitis,  page 226 ; Glue ear,  page 250MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
There may be itchy , blisterlike rashes, with 
burning pains, skin ulcers with raised edges, 
and blisters on the soles of the feet. Round, 
depressed scars develop on the area after the 
eruptions or ulcers have healed.
Symptoms better  For cool weather.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for touch.
Joint pain
SYMPTOMS  Pain in the joints that appears and 
disappears suddenly . Sharp pains may move 
around the joint area.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for lying in  
a warm bed.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for sudden or 
extreme heat; in the summer.Potassium dichromate, the compound used to make this remedy , is also used 
industrially for a variety of purposes, such as the manufacture of chrome pigments. 
The homeopathic remedy was proved by Dr. Drysdale and published in 1864. Like 
other Kali. remedies, it has a strong affinity with the mucous membranes; it is often 
used for conditions that produce profuse catarrh, and for certain skin problems. 
Unlike other Kali. remedies, it may help stomach complaints. POTASSIUM DICHROMATE This powerful oxidizing 
agent is a highly caustic and corrosive poison.Compound forms as 
brightly colored crystals

88•88•
Kalium carbonicum
KALI. CARB.
REMEDY PROFILE
People for whom Kali. carb.  is suitable tend to 
be irritable, touchy , and possessive, feeling at 
odds with everyone, hating to be touched, yet 
wanting company . Conservative and “proper,” 
they have a strong sense of duty and 
responsibility . Emotional upsets are felt as a 
strong sense of fear or anxiety , hitting them 
like a blow to the stomach. These people fear 
many things: the future, loss of self-control, 
death, and even the supernatural.
Among the typical physical symptoms 
associated with the remedy are great 
sensitivity to drafts and the cold. It is 
prescribed for recurrent fever, coughs, colds, 
and other respiratory problems, including 
asthma. There may be sharp, shooting pains 
in parts of the body , and swelling above the 
eyes. Underlying anemia may cause fatigue 
and weakness.
Symptoms typically tend to be worse in the 
early hours of the morning, and insomnia is 
another feature of the Kali. carb.  profile. Those 
for whom the remedy is appropriate tend to 
be middle-aged or older, stout or obese, and 
have a desire for sweet foods.
Coughs & colds
SYMPTOMS  Dry , hacking cough with 
expectoration in the morning of foul-tasting, 
yellowy-green mucus. The cough may be 
whooping or wheezy , with vomiting and a 
chilly feeling in the chest. Kali. carb.  is also 
used for recurrent colds that settle in the 
throat, with hoarseness or voice loss due to 
becoming very chilly after profuse sweating.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for sitting up and 
leaning forward.
Symptoms worse  For cold air and drafts; 
between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m.Asthma
SYMPTOMS  Particularly bad asthma that makes 
it impossible to lie down comfortably , perhaps 
with a dry cough that may disrupt sleep 
between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m.
Symptoms better  For being propped up; for 
sitting up straight; for bending forward with the 
head on the knees.
Symptoms worse  For cold air and drafts; for 
lying down; for exertion.
Joint pain
SYMPTOMS  Sharp pain in the shoulders, arms, 
hips, and legs that is worse on the left side. 
The arms may feel weak and the legs are often 
restless. Arthritis in the joints may be severe 
enough to cause the deformities characteristic 
of rheumatoid arthritis. Sciatica pains may 
prompt a need to sit up or turn over in bed.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold air and drafts; 
between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m.; for lying on the 
affected area.
Back pain
SYMPTOMS  Pain that begins in the small of the 
back, often severe enough to make it 
uncomfortable to stay in bed. The pain is worse 
on the left side, extending to the genitals, thighs, 
and lower limbs. It may be particularly severe 
during pregnancy and labor and after injury , 
childbirth, or pregnancy termination.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for open air.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for drafts; 
between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m.; for long periods of 
sitting; before menstruating.
Kidney disorders
SYMPTOMS  Kidney stones or other diseases of 
the kidney , with shooting pains in the small of 
the back. Pains may be worse on the left side. KEY SYMPTOMS sensitivity to the cold • sharp, shooting pains • anxiety that is felt in 
the stomach • strong sense of duty • person feels worse between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m. MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Originally prepared by percolating wood ash 
and evaporating the resulting solution in  
iron pots: hence the name “potash.” Now 
made chemically.
BACKGROUND
Rarely prescribed internally for medicinal 
purposes, since it is highly caustic, but 
traditionally used in external treatments 
such as skin lotions.
PREPARATION
Potassium carbonate is triturated by being 
ground repeatedly with lactose sugar until it 
is soluble in water. This solution is then 
diluted and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Potassium carbonate, potash, salt of tartar, 
pearl ash.
See also Asthma,  page 181 ; Palpitations  page 186 ; Osteoarthritis,  page 196 ; Whooping cough,  page 250 ; Incontinence,  page 268The eyelids may be puffy .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold air and drafts; 
between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m.
Insomnia
SYMPTOMS  Insomnia, with difficulty getting to 
sleep, or falling asleep but waking between  
2 a.m. and 4 a.m. Getting back to sleep seems 
impossible. There may be talking during sleep.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for open air.
Symptoms worse  For cold air and drafts;  
for lying on the left side of the body;  
before menstruating.Potassium carbonate is a compound of the alkali metal potassium. Used by the ancient 
Egyptians to make glass, the compound is still widely used in the manufacture of 
glass, soap, and other products. In the body , potassium is present in every cell in a 
delicate balance with sodium. Any disturbance of this balance causes many problems, 
including muscle weakness and cardiac arrhythmia. Hahnemann proved the remedy 
and published it in his Chronic Diseases  (1821–34).WOOD ASH
POTASSIUM CARBONATE  This white, odorless 
compound of potassium is a powerful alkali,  
used in industry and in the making of other 
potassium compounds.Wood ash is a 
common source of 
potassium carbonatePOTASSIUM 
CARBONATE

•89
KALI. PHOS.Kalium phosphoricum
REMEDY PROFILE
Extreme mental and physical exhaustion, 
particularly after a period of overwork or 
stress, is typically treated with Kali. phos.  
For this reason it may be given to students 
experiencing nervous collapse. Often down-
to-earth individuals with a strong sense of 
morality, those who respond to Kali. phos.  
tend to be conservative and dogmatic in 
their opinions. Distressing news events, 
such as famine or violence, can easily upset 
them. Extroverted behavior is typical of 
them, yet when fatigued they become 
nervous, introverted, and oversensitive. 
Illness makes them uncommunicative, 
withdrawn, and averse to company, even 
that of family members.
T ypical physical symptoms include an 
inability to keep the feet still, drooping of the left 
eyelid, yellowish bodily discharges, a tendency 
to sweat excessively yet to be sensitive to the 
cold, and spinal pain. In addition to fatigue, 
Kali. phos.  is given for gnawing hunger pains, 
headaches, and insomnia.
Chronic fatigue syndrome
SYMPTOMS  Physical and mental exhaustion 
following an acute illness or overwork. 
Extreme tenderness and weakness in the 
muscles may be accompanied by a slight  
fever. There is general lethargy , depression, 
frustration, anger, and irritability . Heightened 
sensitivity causes susceptibility to the cold  
and flinching at the slightest noise or bright 
light. The tongue is coated yellow.
Symptoms better  For heat; for gentle 
movement; for sleep; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for the slightest 
excitement; for physical exertion; for worry;  
for noise.Abnormal discharges
SYMPTOMS  Purulent yellowy-orange discharge 
from the vagina, bladder, or lungs, or present 
in the stools.
Symptoms better  For heat; for sleep; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For physical and mental 
exertion; for drinking milk.
Hunger pains
SYMPTOMS  Empty, nervous feeling in  
the stomach, related to stress and  
possibly with a headache  (see below) . 
Gnawing hunger pains cause waking  
at about 5 a.m., but food brings only 
temporary relief. Frequent eating between 
meals is typical. Sweet foods such as 
chocolates are often craved, and there  
may be a strong aversion to bread.
Symptoms better  For heat; for gentle 
movement; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For mental exertion; for 
worry; for cold drinks; for drinking milk.
Excess perspiration
SYMPTOMS  Excessive sweating that occurs 
only during bouts of illness, notably with 
severe fatigue  (see left) . Perspiration tends  
to have a characteristic smell of onions. It 
may appear on the head and face, especially 
after the slightest excitement or exertion, or 
after meals.
Symptoms better  For sleep.
Symptoms worse  For physical and mental 
exertion; for eating.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Head pain, generally only on one 
side of the head, with a nervous, empty 
sensation in the stomach  (see above) .
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold.KEY SYMPTOMS mental and physical exhaustion • yellowy-orange discharges  
• chilliness • person feels better for gentle movement 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
A solution of potassium carbonate (see 
opposite) is combined with dilute phosphoric 
acid to form potassium phosphate as a 
precipitate.
BACKGROUND
Used in conventional medicine as one of the 
various compounds administered in solution 
to patients who are fed intravenously.
PREPARATION
The precipitated crystalline compound of 
potassium phosphate is dried, then triturated 
with lactose sugar until soluble in water.
COMMON NAMES
Potassium phosphate, phosphate of potash, 
potassium dihydrogen orthophosphate.
See also  Chronic fatigue symptom,  page 205; Headaches , page 218; Insomnia , page 244MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
Insomnia
SYMPTOMS  Sleeplessness accompanied by an 
empty , nervous sensation in the pit of the 
stomach and possible hunger pains  (see left) .
Symptoms better  For heat; for gentle 
movement; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold, dry air; for mental 
exertion; for worry.
Back pain
SYMPTOMS  Sore, bruising pain down the spine. 
The limbs feel heavy and cold.
Symptoms better  For heat; for gentle 
movement; for sleep.
Symptoms worse  For mental exertion;  
for touch; for going up steps or stairs.Potassium helps to store energy in the body’s cells, maintain the rhythm of  
the heartbeat, and ensure the transmission of nerve impulses. A deficiency  
of potassium in the body is rare, since it is found in most foods. Kali. phos.   
is one of the 12 Schüssler “tissue salts,” which were designed to counter any 
deficiency in the body  (see page 90) . Proved by Dr. H. C. Allen of Chicago in  
1892, the remedy is prescribed mainly for nervous collapse and exhaustion. POTASSIUM PHOSPHATE  According to  
Dr. Schüssler, a deficiency of potassium  
phosphate led to despondency and anxiety.White or 
colorless 
crystals

90•90•
Magnesium phosphoricum
MAG. PHOS.
REMEDY PROFILE
Mag. phos.  is considered most suitable for 
outgoing people who are prone to impulsive 
and restless behavior. Often sensitive, artistic, 
intellectual individuals, they also have a 
tendency to be forgetful and unable to 
concentrate. In addition, they may be prone to 
irritability , nervousness, and exhaustion. 
These people fear the dark, thunderstorms, 
and confrontation with others.
A hypochondriac streak is a common trait 
in these people, marked by sensitivity to the 
cold and regular complaints of muscle 
cramps. Symptoms are generally worse on the 
right side. There may be craving for sugar and 
an aversion to coffee.
Mag. phos.  is usually taken for menstrual or 
neuralgic pains, headaches, sharp abdominal 
pain, toothaches, and earaches.
Abdominal cramps
SYMPTOMS  Sharp, colicky cramps such  
as those associated with irritable bowel 
syndrome. The pain is often right-sided and 
appears and disappears rapidly . Its intensity 
may cause restlessness and cries of pain.  
The abdomen is bloated and there is great 
flatulence that is not eased by belching.  
Severe cases may cause doubling over.
Symptoms better  For heat; for pressure  
on the abdomen.
Symptoms worse  For cold.
Neuralgia
SYMPTOMS  Sharp, radiating, cramping  
pains that appear and disappear rapidly 
anywhere in the body , prompting cries  
of pain and restlessness. Muscles are  
stiff, numb, and awkward, especially  
after exertion.Symptoms better  For heat; for hot baths;  
for firm pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; at night.
Menstrual cramps
SYMPTOMS  Sudden cramping, shooting pains 
in the lower abdomen during menstruation.
Symptoms better  For heat; for doubling over;  
for hot drinks.
Symptoms worse  On the right side;  
before menstruation.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Spasmodic, shooting pains on the 
right side or the back of the neck, spreading 
over the head and settling around the right eye. 
Characteristically the face is red and throbbing. 
Such headaches are common in teenage girls.
Symptoms better  For heat; for pressure on  
the head.
Symp toms worse  For cold.
Toothaches
SYMPTOMS  Dull, throbbing pain, or sharp 
twinges of pain, common in teething infants.
Symptoms better  For heat; for warm compresses; 
for firm pressure on the gums or tooth.
Symptoms worse  For cold drafts; for touch.
Cramps
SYMPTOMS  Sudden onset of stabbing cramps in 
the arms, fingers, wrists, and hands, which are 
especially common in musicians and writers.
Symptoms better  For heat; for firm pressure  
on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold.
Earaches
SYMPTOMS  Pains in the ear that are spasmodic 
and shooting, especially following exposure  
to cold wind.KEY SYMPTOMS cramping pain • sensitive, artistic, intellectual temperament • complaints 
that tend to affect the right side of the body • person feels better for warmth MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
See also Colic,  page 246 ; Painful periods,  page 256Symptoms better  For heat; for firm pressure  
on the ear.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for turning the head.Of all the minerals present in the human body , magnesium is exceeded in quantity 
only by potassium. Magnesium regulates mineral balance and a deficiency can 
cause neuralgic pains. Mag. phos.  is known as the “homeopathic aspirin” because it 
is commonly taken for minor aches and pains. Proved by Drs. W . P . Wessehoeft 
and J. A. Gann, it was published in Dr. H. C. Allen’s Medical Advances  (1889), and 
is most often prescribed for cramping pain or neuralgia.MAGNESIUM PHOSPHATE  This  
compound does not exist in nature,  
but is prepared chemically from  
sodium phosphate and epsomite.SODIUM 
PHOSPHATE
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Sodium carbonate and phosphoric acid are 
used to make sodium phosphate. 
Magnesium sulfate forms in caves and on 
rock faces as epsomite.
BACKGROUND
The human body needs magnesium to break 
down nutrients, and this magnesium 
compound was chosen as a “tissue salt”  
by Dr. Schüssler.
PREPARATION
Magnesium sulfate and sodium phosphate 
are mixed in water and left to crystallize.  
The resulting crystals are then triturated 
with lactose sugar.
COMMON NAMES
Magnesium phosphate, phosphate  
of magnesia.EPSOMITE (MAGNESIUM SULFATE)Mineral has 
fibrous strands

•91
NAT. CARB.Natrum carbonicum
REMEDY PROFILE
People for whom Nat. carb.  is most suited are 
very sensitive. They usually have an inability 
to assimilate things on both an emotional and 
a physical level. For example, there may be an 
emotional inability to tolerate noise, music, 
thunderstorms, hot weather, and even other 
people. Physically , this inability to assimilate 
things might, for example, manifest as 
digestive problems. These people tend to 
devote their lives to one person, sacrificing 
everything to this relationship. Prone to 
suppressing emotions, they tend to act 
cheerful even when sad, which compounds 
the mental strain, fatigue, and irritability  
they often feel.
People who respond to Nat. carb.  may find 
that mental stress or physical exercise when 
tired aggravates their symptoms.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion with belching, 
sourness, and a feeling of nausea. There is  
a marked intolerance of milk, so that 
ingestion of even the smallest amount often 
causes diarrhea. The abdomen may feel 
painful when touched and there may be 
thirst, especially when the stomach is upset. 
An empty, gnawing sensation in the stomach 
is common, especially around 5 a.m., and 
may be assuaged by getting up and eating 
something sweet. Constant nibbling, 
especially of bread and sweets, is a typical 
accompanying symptom.
Symptoms bette r For pressure on the 
abdomen; for movement; for eating little  
and often.Symptoms worse  For heat and sun; for 
sympathy and fuss; for drinking milk.
Colds & catarrh
SYMPTOMS  Colds that are aggravated by sitting 
in a draft, with catarrh running down the 
back of the throat. The catarrh may smell foul.
Symptoms better  For perspiring.
Symptoms worse  For drafts; every second day.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Headaches that alternate with pain 
in the stomach, accompanied by sensitivity to 
noise and music. Headaches may be caused 
by studying or other demanding mental 
activity , or by overexposure to the sun. There 
may be a feeling of dizziness.
Symptoms better  For movement; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For sun and hot weather; for 
drafts; for thunderstorms; for mental exertion.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  A wide variety of skin complaints, 
such as warts, moles, blisters, and corns, with 
either very dry skin or a tendency to perspire 
very easily . There may be extreme sensitivity 
to sunlight, with the result that even the slightest 
exposure may cause sunburn or sunstroke.
Symptoms better  For pressing on, rubbing,  
or scratching the affected skin.
Symptoms worse  For heat.
Ankle weakness
SYMPTOMS  Easily sprained or dislocated 
ankles, particularly in children.
Symptoms better  For rubbing or pressing on 
the ankle.
Symptoms worse  For overexertion.KEY SYMPTOMS devoted to loved ones • suppression of emotions  
• weak ankles • sensitivity to sunlight • intolerance of milk 
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Once extracted from the ashes of burned 
seaweed, but now chemically prepared  
using sodium chloride, ammonia, and 
carbon dioxide.
BACKGROUND
Traditionally used in 19th-century Western 
medicine as a treatment for burns, eczema, 
catarrh, and vaginal discharges.
PREPARATION
Sodium carbonate is mixed with lactose 
sugar and triturated to grind it into a powder 
ﬁne enough to be soluble in water.
COMMON NAMES
Sodium carbonate, soda ash, washing soda.
See also Infertility,  page 203 ; Allergies,  page 206;  Phobias,  page 211 ; Depression,  page 212MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
Exhaustion
SYMPTOMS  Nervous fatigue due to 
overexposure to the sun or overwork.  
The legs may feel weak and heavy .
Symptoms better  For rubbing or pressing  
on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for noise;  
for any exertion.Roughly 35 million tons of sodium carbonate are produced 
industrially each year, particularly for use in making glass, 
ceramics, paper, and detergents. Traditionally , its use in medicine 
was largely confined to external remedies; as a homeopathic 
remedy , it is used for digestive problems, nervous disorders, and 
skin complaints. Nat. carb.  was proved by Hahnemann, with  
Drs. Gross, Hering, Langhammer, and others, and published  
in Hahnemann’s Chronic Diseases  (1821–34).
SODIUM CARBONATE  Sodium carbonate is used 
worldwide in products such as household cleaners, 
water softeners, and soap.Crystals form when 
brine and seawater 
absorb carbon dioxide

92•92•
Natrum chloratum syn. N. muriaticum
NAT. MUR.
REMEDY PROFILE
Nat. mur .  is most suitable for sensitive 
people who are easily wounded by criticism. 
They keep a tight rein on emotions, but this 
can lead to moodiness and self-absorption. 
Despite a desire for company, they feel 
awkward in social situations and isolate 
themselves to avoid being hurt, thus 
seeming self-reliant and stoic. Inhibition 
and self-awareness may restrict them: for 
instance, they may be unable to urinate in  
a public toilet. They are often conscientious, 
diligent, and loyal in their relationships.
Suppressing strong emotions such as 
depression, anxiety, or grief is often a cause  
of illness. These people hate sympathy and 
fuss. They are prone to colds, crave salt, 
and feel worse for stuffy heat, sunshine, 
eating, physical exertion, and sweating. 
They may be worse by the seaside.
Colds
SYMPTOMS  Profuse, runny catarrh that tends  
to resemble uncooked egg white and may  
slip down the throat. There may be a dry , 
hacking cough.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for bathing in 
cool water.
Symptoms worse  For heat; between 9 a.m.  
and 11 a.m.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  A hammering, bursting headache  
or migraine above the eyes, possibly with 
vision disturbances such as zigzag lines.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the eyes;  
for lying in the dark.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for light; for noise;  
for movement; for reading; between 10 a.m. and 
3 p.m.; for menstruating; for sun on the head.Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Greasy skin and hair, with  
dandruff around the hairline. Warts, boils, 
psoriasis, urticaria (hives), hangnails, and cold 
sores on the nose and lips may be helped by 
the remedy .
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for bathing in 
cool water; for perspiring; for fasting.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for sunshine; for 
sea air; after menstruating.
Mouth & throat conditions
SYMPTOMS  Cold sores, mouth ulcers, dental 
abscesses, and gingivitis (bleeding gums). 
The lips may be cracked and dry, with a 
split running down the center of the lower 
lip. The tongue is bright red with a white 
coating, and has a tendency to develop 
blisters. Extreme thirst, a bitter-tasting 
mouth, and halitosis are also typical 
symptoms. A sore throat may occur, 
producing white mucus and the sensation  
of having a lump in the throat.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for fasting.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for sea air; for 
emotional stress.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Vaginal discharge that resembles 
uncooked egg white, usually due to thrush. 
Fatigue may develop before and after menstrual 
periods. Premenstrual syndrome is marked by 
water retention and severe headaches ( see left ). 
Menstruation may be irregular, and shock or 
grief may stop it entirely . A dry , sore vagina may 
even lead to vaginismus (painful spasms during 
sexual intercourse).
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for lying on  
the right side.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for  
emotional stress.KEY SYMPTOMS ailments that are brought on by suppression of emotions • person  
feels worse for consolation • craving for salt • discharges that resemble egg whiteMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
See also Skin, page 192;  Migraines,  page 218;  Respiration,  page 224;  Gingivitis,  page 232;  Cold sores,  page 242Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Constipation with hard, dry stools, 
colicky pains with nausea, and possibly anal 
fissures, rectal bleeding, and backaches. There 
may be sour belches and a bitter taste in the 
mouth. Any diarrhea is only evident during 
the day .
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for tight 
clothing; for lying on the right side; for fasting.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for emotional 
stress; for fuss.Sodium chloride, the main ingredient of this remedy , occurs naturally as the mineral 
halite, or rock salt, and in salt water. An essential part of the human diet, deficiency 
causes fatigue and muscle cramps, while excess intake is thought to exacerbate high 
blood pressure and heart disease. In conventional medicine salt is administered as 
saline solution, often to replace fluid loss. Nat. mur .  was proved and published by 
Hahnemann in his Chronic Diseases  (1821–34).
SALT A common source of salt is the mineral 
halite, also known as rock salt, which forms 
where ancient saltwater lakes, possibly 
underground, have evaporated.
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Rock salt is obtained from underground 
sources in the form of halite. Salt is also 
produced when sea water is evaporated.
BACKGROUND
Historically of immense economic value in 
trade as a preservative and a condiment, 
but has had limited medicinal uses  
outside homeopathy.
PREPARATION
Rock salt is dissolved in boiling water, 
ﬁltered, and evaporated to make pure 
sodium chloride, which is then triturated  
with lactose sugar.
COMMON NAMES
Salt, rock salt, sodium chloride. Halite has a 
glassy luster
HALITE CRYSTALCOARSE-GROUND ROCK SALT

•93
PETROLEUMPetroleum rectificatum syn. Oleum petrae
REMEDY PROFILE
Those who are best suited to Petroleum  can  
be irritable and argumentative, and may  
lose their tempers easily . Known for their 
inability to make decisions, they tend also  
to be forgetful, which may lead to confusion  
and disorientation, to the point of losing their 
way even in familiar streets. A strange sense  
of physical duality may be experienced, as if 
their bodies are divided, or not entirely  
their own.
Symptoms are usually worse during the day 
and in winter. These individuals generally feel 
chilly , and prone to offensive-smelling 
perspiration from the feet and armpits even in 
cold weather. An aversion to rich, fatty foods 
is also common. Inhaling petrochemical fumes 
may aggravate symptoms and cause weakness 
and irritability .
Petroleum  is often given for skin problems 
such as eczema, psoriasis, and chilblains. It is 
also used for complaints such as diarrhea, 
nausea, travel sickness, morning sickness, 
halitosis, and migraines.
Eczema & psoriasis
SYMPTOMS  The skin is dry and leathery with 
deep cracks, especially on the palms of the 
hands, the tips of the fingers, and in the folds  
of the skin—for example, behind the ears or  
the knees. Extreme itchiness may provoke 
scratching that causes bleeding and possible 
infection. The itching tends to be worse at night. 
There may be psoriasis, with thick patches of 
scaly , inflamed skin causing great discomfort.  
In addition, the skin may be prone to cold sores, 
boils, and chilblains  (see right) . Petroleum  is 
especially appropriate if the symptoms are due 
to hard manual labor or regular exposure  
to chemicals.Symptoms better  For warm weather; after eating.
Symptoms worse  For the heat of the bed;  
in winter.
Chilblains
SYMPTOMS  Intensely itching, burning skin, 
especially on the hands, feet, and toes. The 
skin may be scratched raw, causing a weepy 
discharge to develop and possibly infection  
to set in.
Symptoms better  For dry weather; for warm air.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
for touch.
Diarrhea & nausea
SYMPTOMS  Diarrhea that is present only 
during the day. Constant, ravenous hunger 
may even lead to getting out of bed to eat 
snacks during the night. Hunger increases 
after a bowel movement, but there is a 
cutting pain in the abdomen that is worse 
for eating. An aversion to cabbage, peas, 
beans, meat, and fatty foods is 
characteristic. There may be nausea 
accompanied by vomiting, dizziness, and 
pressing head pain at the back of the skull  
(see right) . Another associated symptom may 
be halitosis with a strong odor of garlic. 
Symptoms may be linked to morning 
sickness, travel sickness  (see below) , or 
eating disorders such as bulimia nervosa, 
anorexia nervosa, or other psychological 
conditions that cause long-term bingeing.
Symptoms better  Temporarily after eating; for 
passing stools; for bending double.
Symptoms worse  For cold weather; for 
movement; in the morning; when eating.
Travel sickness
SYMPTOMS  Nausea and vomiting when 
traveling, often with a severe headache   
See also Psoriasis,  page 195MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
(see below) . Nausea may develop upon the 
slightest movement, with increased salivation.
Symptoms better  Temporarily after eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold weather; for fresh 
air; for movement.
Migraines
SYMPTOMS  Severe headache, with a sensation 
of great heaviness at the back of the head. The 
scalp is sensitive to the cold and to touch. The 
head may feel sensitive, as if a cold breeze is 
blowing on it, or numb and wooden. A degree 
of temporary deafness is a possible associated 
symptom, and there may be an accompanying 
feeling of nausea  (see above) .
Symptoms better  For pressure on the temples.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touch; for shaking 
when coughing.KEY SYMPTOMS cracked skin • chilliness • aversion to fatty foods • irritability  
• offensive-smelling perspiration • person tends to feel worse in winter
Petroleum (from the Latin petra, or “rock,” and oleum , “oil”) is formed by the 
decomposition of plant and animal matter in rock sediment deposits on the sea 
bed. Over time, heat and pressure transform this organic material into petroleum, 
or crude oil. It is used in the manufacture of many goods, from fertilizers to paints 
and plastics to explosives. Proved by Hahnemann and published in his Chronic 
Diseases  (1821–34), the remedy is prescribed mainly for skin complaints and nausea.
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Extracted from deposits, mainly 
concentrated in the North Sea, the Persian 
Gulf, and parts of North and South America.
BACKGROUND
Used as fuel in the form of gasoline, 
kerosene, and diesel. Petroleum jelly is 
used in conventional medicine as an 
emollient and protective dressing.
PREPARATION
The remedy is made by distilling puriﬁed 
crude oil or petroleum. This solution is then 
diluted using sulfuric acid, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Petroleum, crude oil, rock oil.PETROLEUM  This major mineral resource  
is used to fuel machinery and vehicles, and  
in road- and ship-building.

94•
Phosphorus
REMEDY PROFILE
People who love being the center of attention 
respond best to Phosphorus . Like a match that 
sparks readily but burns out intensely , they 
are artistic, expressive, and affectionate, but 
may offer more than they can sustain. Illness 
or stress rapidly exhausts their energy , making 
them lethargic and indifferent toward loved 
ones, but highly responsive to any sympathy 
offered. They feel better for short naps.  
Vague anxieties crystallize into concrete  
fears when ill, leading to nervous fatigue  
and tension.
Cravings for salty , spicy , or sweet foods, and 
cold, carbonated drinks or cold milk are 
typical. Warm foods or drinks may upset the 
stomach, as may cold drinks once they have 
warmed up in the stomach.
Phosphorus  is prescribed for circulation 
problems, bleeding, digestive disorders, chest 
complaints, and burning pains.
Poor circulation
SYMPTOMS  The extremities feel burning hot, 
yet are cold to the touch. Erratic blood flow 
may cause a weak pulse, hot flushes, fainting, 
dizziness, or palpitations. There may be 
burning neuralgic pain  (see right) , and  
a sense of suffocation, possibly triggered by 
emotion or menopause.
Symptoms better  For cold; for massage;  
for lying on the right side; for sleeping;  
for eating.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left  
side; for thundery weather; for  
emotional stress.Bleeding
SYMPTOMS  Profuse, bright red blood flow , 
especially from the nose, gums, and lining of the 
stomach. Menstrual flow may be heavy. The 
skin bruises easily and anemia may set in.
Symptoms better  For cold; for massage; for 
lying on the right side; for sleeping; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left side; for 
thundery weather; for emotional stress.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Nausea, vomiting, and constipation, 
often due to food poisoning, stress, stomach 
ulcers, or gastroenteritis. Other symptoms 
include a saliva-filled mouth and burning pain 
in the stomach, or heartburn. Stools are long, 
ribbonlike, and may be blood-streaked. Ice-cold 
foods and drinks are craved, but then cause 
vomiting once they warm up in the stomach.
Symptoms better  For lying on the right side; 
for eating; for cold foods or drinks.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left side; for 
stuffy rooms; for emotional stress; for warm 
foods or salt.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  A sore throat and dry, tickly 
cough, possibly causing retching and 
vomiting. Phlegm is streaked with dark-red 
blood. Chest tightness may be due to 
asthma, bronchitis, or pneumonia. Colds 
tend to go straight to the chest.
Symptoms better  For sitting up; for lying on 
the right side of the body; for sleep; for cold 
foods or drinks.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left side;  
for laughing; for warm foods or drinks.KEY SYMPTOMS  affectionate, open nature • tearfulness • cravings for cold 
drinks & salty foods • burning pains • person feels worse for lying on the  
left side of the bodyMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
A pale yellow element with a distinct odor, 
occurring in the mineral calcium phosphate 
in volcanic regions. The main deposits are 
found in North Africa.
BACKGROUND
Used medicinally for headaches, pneumonia, 
measles, rheumatic pain, malaria, and 
epilepsy until the 19th century, when its 
toxic nature became widely known.
PREPARATION
White phosphorus is used for the remedy. 
This waxy substance is insoluble in water, 
so it is dissolved in alcohol, ﬁltered, then 
repeatedly diluted and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Phosphorus, white phosphorus,  
yellow phosphorus.
See also  Respiration,  pages 180, 224 ; Palpitations,  page 186 ; Digestion,  pages 188, 234 ; Reproduction,  page 198Burning pains
SYMPTOMS  Burning neuralgic pains in the 
limbs, spine, or stomach, possibly with pins 
and needles and numbness, especially in  
the limbs, spine, or shoulder blades.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses;  
for massage.
Symptoms worse  For windy weather;  
for emotional stress.Phosphorus was discovered in the 17th century by the German alchemist 
Hennig Brand. He kept secret his method of extracting it from urine, but it 
was soon discovered by the Irish chemist Robert Boyle. The name is derived 
from the Greek phosphoros , or “light-bringing,” since the element glows in 
the dark. From 1669 the unstable, highly toxic white (or yellow) 
phosphorus was used to make fireworks and matches, but by 1845 it had 
been replaced by the nontoxic red form. The remedy was proved by 
Hahnemann and published in his Chronic Diseases  (1821–34).
PHOSPHORUS  Overexposure to the white form of 
the element can be deadly, since it is highly toxic.White phosphorus is 
volatile and ignites 
on contact with airPHOSPHORUS
Water prevents element 
from coming into contact 
with oxygen, which would 
cause spontaneous 
combustion

•95
PLATINAPlatinum metallicum
REMEDY PROFILE
Chiefly a remedy for women, Platina  is best 
suited to those who tend to be haughty and 
passionate. High expectations set for 
themselves and their partners are frequently 
not met, causing disappointment. They 
often dwell on the past, and may feel that 
others have deserted them. A sense of 
isolation may lead them to become 
independent and introspective. Narcissistic 
tendencies are accompanied by a feeling 
that they deserve the very best of 
everything. If this is denied them, they  
may become rather arrogant and depressed. 
Weeping may bring relief. Curiously, objects 
often appear to these people to be smaller 
than they actually are.
Platina  suits those with alternating 
emotional and physical symptoms. Any pain 
increases and decreases slowly. Secretions 
such as menstrual blood and tears tend to 
be sticky. The libido is often high. Platina  is 
used for sexual and menstrual problems in 
women, and nervous-system disorders in 
both men and women.
Menstrual problems
SYMPTOMS  Heavy, brief, or absent 
menstruation. Heavy menstrual flow may 
contain blood clots. There may be painful 
uterine cramps that are worse as menstruation 
begins, with a sense of constriction and 
numbness in the lower abdomen. Pain  
may also be felt around the ovaries.Symptoms better  For walking in the open air; 
for sunshine; for stretching.
Symptoms worse  For touch; in the evening;  
for emotional stress; for nervous fatigue.
Oversensitivity of the  
female genitalia
SYMPTOMS  Hypersensitive vulva and vagina 
during and between menstrual periods that 
may cause rapid stimulation during sexual 
intercourse, or else extreme pain and even 
fainting. The vaginal muscles may spasm 
involuntarily (vaginismus). There may be 
genital itching, a high libido, and a tendency 
to masturbate. The pain is intermittent, not 
necessarily occurring every time sexual 
intercourse takes place, but tends to be worse 
as menstruation begins. It can make vaginal 
examination and wearing a sanitary towel or 
tampon highly uncomfortable.
Symptoms bett er  For walking in the open air; 
for sunshine; for stretching. .
Symptoms worse  For touch; in the evening;  
for emotional stress; for nervous fatigue.
Numbness & cramps
SYMPTOMS  Cold, numb skin, cramps in the 
calves, and a constricted feeling in the limbs, 
especially the thighs, as if the limbs are  
tightly bandaged.
Symptoms better  For walking in the open air; 
for sunshine; for stretching.
Symptoms worse  For touch; in the evening;  
for emotional stress; for nervous fatigue.KEY SYMPTOMS high expectations • hypersexuality • numbness • sense 
of constriction, as if bandaged • person feels better in the open air
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Usually forms as grains in or by nickel 
deposits. Found mainly in South America, 
but also in Canada and Russia.
BACKGROUND
Given as a remedy for treating syphilis in the 
19th century, but not otherwise widely used 
until the 20th century.
PREPARATION
Grains of platinum are boiled in acid, 
washed, and dried. They are then triturated 
with lactose sugar.
COMMON NAME Platinum.
See also  Depression,  page 212MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
Head & facial pain
SYMPTOMS  Pain and a sense of constriction  
in the head that builds up and disappears 
slowly. There may be neuralgic pains in  
the face that alternate with numbness,  
or painless paralysis of the face due to  
Bell’s palsy.
Symptoms better  For walking in the open air; 
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for  
bending backward.The Chibcha Indians of Columbia were the first people recorded 
as using platinum, in 1735. Its name derives from the Latin 
platina , meaning “little silver.” Today it is considered more  
valuable than gold or silver, and plays a key role in modern 
technology . A costly , malleable metal, platinum is 
fashioned into coinage, jewelry , surgical instruments, 
and dental alloys. It is used industrially to refine oil 
and reduce pollution from exhaust fumes. The 
homeopathic remedy was proved by Drs. Staph and 
Gross, two pupils of Hahnemann, and published in the 
latter’s Chronic Diseases  (1821–34).PLATINUM GRAINS
PLATINUM DEPOSITS IN ROCK  Platinum deposits 
are silvery-gray to white. Unlike  
many metals, platinum does not corrode.

96•96•
Plumbum metallicum
PLUMBUM MET.
REMEDY PROFILE
While the profile for Plumbum met.  is associated 
mainly with physical symptoms, irritability , 
timidity , restlessness, apathy , anxiety , and 
depression are all psychological factors that  
may be linked to Plumbum met.  The emotional 
traits may begin in childhood: children suited  
to the remedy are restless, with a weak memory 
and emotional instability . Adults who respond 
best to Plumbum met.  have a tendency to be  
self-centered, with self-destructive impulses. 
They may have a strong sense of order.
There may be difficulties in perception,  
a reduced ability to express thoughts,  
and memory loss. These symptoms show  
a lack of emotional pliability that may be 
echoed by a loss of physical flexibility.  
Thus the remedy is given for sclerotic 
(tissue-hardening) conditions such as 
arteriosclerosis, which thickens and hardens 
arteries, and Dupuytren’s contracture,  
a disorder affecting one or both of the 
hands, in which one or more fingers 
become fixed in a bent position.
Neurological conditions
SYMPTOMS  Spasms, trembling, and muscle 
weakness  (see right) . The joints may be rigid 
and, between spasms, movement is slow. If 
the sensory nervous system is affected, there 
may be vision disturbances and a loss of 
feeling, so that external sources of pain, 
such as the heat of an oven or pin-pricks, 
are not felt. These symptoms may indicate  
a progressive neurological disorder such as 
multiple sclerosis or Parkinson’s disease. 
Symptoms may also occur after a stroke (often due to arteriosclerosis blocking the 
blood supply to the brain—another example 
of the thickening and hardening traits 
linked to the remedy), possibly with pain or 
paralysis in a limb. Plumbum met.   
is also used for neuralgic pains that appear 
suddenly and radiate in all directions or 
shoot from the toes to the hips.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for massage or 
pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  At night; for movement.
Muscle weakness
SYMPTOMS  Weakness, spasms, and trembling  
in the muscles, which feel tired, heavy , and 
aching. There is a sense of retraction—for 
example, as if the eyes are being pulled back 
into the head or the testicles or penis are 
being pulled up into the body . There may  
be wrist drop due to weakness in the  
wrist muscles.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for massage or 
pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  At night; for movement.
Constipation
SYMPTOMS  Colicky pains in the stomach and 
constipation. There is a constant urge to 
defecate, but often only small, black,  
ball-shaped stools are passed. Painful urine 
retention and a sensation as if the navel is 
being pulled into the backbone are further 
possible symptoms.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for bending 
double; for firm pressure on the abdomen; for 
massage of the abdomen.
Symptoms worse  For fasting; in the evening 
and at night; for movement.KEY SYMPTOMS  mental dullness • hardening of attitude and state of mind • hardening 
or thickening of tissues and arteries • extreme chilliness • shooting painsMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Most commonly occurring in galena, a lead 
ore which is found in Australia, the US, 
Africa, and Europe.
BACKGROUND
Soft and malleable, and has been used to 
make everyday objects, from plumbing to 
hairpins, since Roman times.
PREPARATION
For the mother tincture, pure lead is 
extracted from galena and ﬁnely ground  
until it becomes soluble in alcohol.
COMMON NAME
Lead.
See also  Multiple sclerosis,  page 179 ; Diabetes,  page 191 ; Vaginismus,  page 260Dupuytren’s contracture
SYMPTOMS  Thickened and shortened tissues 
or tendons in the fingers or the palms of the 
hands. One or more fingers may become 
fixed in a bent position. Either or both 
hands may be affected.
Symptoms better  For massage of the  
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For trying to grasp  
smooth objects.Although lead has been widely used since Roman times, its toxicity was 
not recognized until the 20th century . It is now banned from paints to 
prevent children from being poisoned by chewing lead-based toy or crib 
paint, and was phased out of gasoline because of fears that it may impair 
mental development in children. Physical symptoms of lead poisoning 
include wrist drop and colicky abdominal pains. Plumbum met.  was proved 
by Drs. Hering, Hartlaub, Trinks, and Menning, and published in Allen’s 
Encyclopedia of Pure Materia Medica  (1874–79).
LEAD  Usually mined as galena, a common lead 
ore, lead is widely used but highly toxic. Inhaling 
or swallowing particles of lead can harm the 
nervous system.GALENAGalena forms as 
perfect cubic shapes 
with well-defined steps

•97
SILICASilicea terra syn. Acidum silicicum
REMEDY PROFILE
People who respond best to Silica  typically 
lack mental and physical stamina. Their over-
conscientious attitude to work can often lead 
to exhaustion or insomnia. They may feel 
anxious and “in two minds” about things, and 
fear pointed objects, such as needles. Their 
outlook and aspirations are limited by fear of 
failure. Very shy as children, they are self-
conscious and unassertive as adults, but can 
be extremely stubborn and may relieve their 
frustrations on subordinates.
Chilliness is a typical physical symptom, 
along with a marked tendency for profuse, 
smelly sweat. Digestive problems and a 
weakened bone structure, due to poor 
absorption of food and undernourishment, 
may occur, along with recurrent infections 
caused by a weak immune system. Skin and 
bone problems are slow to heal and any 
wounds tend to suppurate.
Many symptoms appear at an early age: the 
fontanelles (membrane-covered spaces 
between the bones of a baby’s skull) close 
slowly , for instance, and the bones and teeth 
form more slowly and are weaker than those 
of other children.
Skin, teeth, nail & bone 
conditions
SYMPTOMS  Slow eruption of teeth, wisdom 
teeth problems, and defects in skin, hair, and 
nails, due to poor absorption of minerals in 
the diet. Brittle, distorted, infected nails and 
ingrown toenails are also common symptoms. 
Wounds, even scratches, suppurate and heal 
slowly; abscesses may form anywhere, 
including in the roots of teeth. There may be 
itchy scars or keloids after larger wounds, persistent acne, and copious, smelly sweating. 
Backaches are common; brittle, poor-quality 
bones are slow to mend if broken; and there 
may be curvature of the spine.
Symptoms better  In summer; for lying down;  
for being well wrapped up.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; when 
menstruating; for pressure on the painful area.
Ear, nose & throat conditions
SYMPTOMS  Recurrent colds, swollen glands, ear 
infections, and tonsillitis leading to quinsy 
(abscess on the tonsil). Chronic catarrh may 
cause sinusitis, and glue ear (fluid in the middle 
ear) may cause earaches and hearing problems.
Symptoms better  For lying down; for being well 
wrapped up; for warm drinks.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for drafts; 
for suppressing perspiration.
Coughs
SYMPTOMS  A persistent, dry , irritating cough 
that takes the form of severe, exhausting 
coughing bouts. Inflammatory conditions 
such as bronchitis may be accompanied by 
foul-smelling sputum.
Symptoms better  For being well wrapped up; 
for lying down; for warm drinks.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for drafts; 
for suppressing perspiration.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  A weak digestive system, with 
intolerance of particular foods, especially fat 
and milk; in babies this may even include 
mother’s milk. There may be poor absorption 
of essential minerals into the body , and a 
preference for cold foods. Symptoms may 
include constipation, with an inability to expel 
stools so that they slip back into the rectum, KEY SYMPTOMS  lack of assertiveness and stubbornness • lack of stamina • chilliness,  
but with offensive-smelling perspiration • susceptibility to recurrent infections
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Hahnemann prepared Silica  from mountain 
crystal; homeopaths later made it from ﬂint. 
Chemically prepared silicon dioxide (silica 
sand) is now used.
BACKGROUND
Used as silica sand in industry in the 
making of cement and concrete, as well as 
ceramics and glass. It is also used to grind 
and polish glass and stone.
PREPARATION
Made by triturating silicon dioxide, grinding 
the sand repeatedly with lactose sugar until 
it becomes soluble in water, then diluting 
and succussing it.
COMMON NAMES
Silica, ﬂint, quartz, rock crystal.
See also  Tuberculosis,  page 182 ; Diabetes,  page 191 ; Skin,  page 192 ; Osteoarthritis,  page 196 ; Reproduction,  page 198MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
which may develop painful cracks (fissures)  
or abscesses. Painful abdominal cramps and 
smelly flatulence are other symptoms.
Symptoms better  In summer; for being well 
wrapped up.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; at a new 
moon; for suppressing perspiration.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Severe pain, starting at the back of 
the head and extending over to the forehead, 
with dizziness and visual disturbance.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for closed eyes; 
for dark, quiet rooms; for wrapping the head.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for light; for noise.Silica is a form of the nonmetallic element silicon, which is one of the major 
elements of Earth’s crust and a vital constituent in the structure of plants. In the 
human body , it strengthens teeth, hair, and nails and is also found in connective 
tissue. Silica , proved by Hahnemann in 1828 and given more for slow-developing 
conditions than for acute ailments, has the unusual feature of reputedly being able 
to help expel foreign bodies such as splinters from the skin.FLINT
SILICA A principal constituent 
of sandstone and other 
rocks, silica is found in 
many forms, from colorless 
rock crystal to stonelike  
flint and semiprecious  
stones such as opal. SILICON DIOXIDE

98•98•
Stibium sulphuratum nigrum syn. Antimonium crudum
ANTIMONIUM CRUD.
REMEDY PROFILE
Antimonium crud.  is associated with 
sentimental people who yearn for the past. 
They can be withdrawn, sulky , irritable 
people, prone to experiencing grief, serious 
depression, or despondency after a failed 
romance. They often dislike being touched  
or even spoken to. When ill, children who fit 
this profile cannot bear being looked at and 
have a tendency to cry . Both adults and 
children of this disposition may have 
insatiable appetites, yet in some cases there  
is a strong aversion to food, which can 
eventually lead to emaciation.
T ypical physical symptoms include 
recurring digestive problems and the 
appearance of a thick, white coating on the 
tongue. The feet tend to be sensitive and 
prone to ailments such as corns and calluses, 
which make walking painful.
Antimonium crud.  is typically prescribed  
for certain skin conditions and infections,  
as well as for toothaches, digestive problems, 
and gout.
Skin & nail conditions
SYMPTOMS  Calluses, warts, and corns that may 
form on the hands, under the fingernails 
(especially if the nails are damaged), on the 
soles of the feet, and on the tips of the toes. 
The skin may thicken, chap, or roughen easily , 
and cracked patches may form, particularly 
around the nostrils and the corners of the 
mouth. The nails may split repeatedly .
Symptoms better  For rest; in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for strong heat;  
for touch.KEY SYMPTOMS  sentimentality • dislike of being touched or looked at • insatiable 
appetite • thick, white coating on the tongue • digestive problemsMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
See also  Toothaches,  page 232 ; Indigestion,  page 234 ; Skin,  page 240Symptoms better  For rest.
Symptoms worse  During the night; for touch; 
for sour or starchy foods; for cold foods  
and drinks.
Gout
SYMPTOMS  Inflammation and redness in 
affected joints (often in the big toe). Joint pain 
impedes walking if the leg or foot are affected. 
A mild fever may set in, and there may be 
unease and restlessness, with tense and  
jumpy muscles.
Symptoms better  For rest.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for strong heat;  
for touch.Antimony occurs naturally in crystalline form as the mineral stibnite, 
which was used (as kohl) by women in ancient Rome and the 
Middle East as a cosmetic. Prepared chemically for various industrial 
purposes, it is often used to coat the tips of matches, since it ignites 
when struck against red phosphorus. The homeopathic remedy was 
proved by Hahnemann and his colleague, Caspari, in 1828. It is 
prescribed primarily for skin problems and digestive disorders.
Skin infections with a rash
SYMPTOMS  A rash on the trunk, arms,  
and legs, inside the mouth or, in the case  
of chicken pox, behind the ears, with  
mild fever. There may be eczema, urticaria 
(hives), or rashes that resemble measles, with 
itching that becomes worse in a warm 
environment such as a bed. Fluid-filled 
blisters, often due to impetigo, may  
appear in patches, usually around the  
nose and mouth.
Symptoms better  For rest; in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for strong heat;  
for touch.
Toothache
SYMPTOMS  Persistent, gnawing toothache, 
usually caused by decaying teeth. The pain 
can extend to the head.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for rest.
Symptoms worse  At night; for eating; for cold 
foods and drinks.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion, with belching,  
nausea, and possibly vomiting of bile.  
The abdomen feels either bloated or empty , 
and stomach ulcers may have formed. 
Diarrhea alternates with constipation.  
The tongue has a thick, white coating, and 
there may be a headache. The digestion is 
highly sensitive, yet there may be cravings  
for sour foods that aggravate it, such as 
pickles, vinegar, and wine. Overindulgence 
and pregnancy often trigger the symptoms. 
The remedy is given to babies who vomit 
breast milk and will not suckle, or to  
their mothers.ANTIMONY  This substance can be derived 
from the prismatic crystals of stibnite, 
which are opaque with a metallic luster.STIBNITE
ORIGIN
Found naturally in the mineral stibnite, which 
forms as crystals in quartz veins throughout 
many parts of the US and Europe.
BACKGROUND
Used to treat horses with damaged  
hooves, and to fatten pigs and cattle. 
Industrially, used to purify gold and to  
line brass instruments.
PREPARATION
Stibnite is roasted and heated with carbon 
to extract the antimony, which is then 
triturated with lactose sugar, diluted,  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Antimony, black sulﬁde of antimony.SOURCE DETAILS

•99
SULFURSulfur
REMEDY PROFILE
Those best suited to Sulfur  are imaginative and 
inventive, but inept practically . A key problem 
is being unable to channel their disorganized, 
philosophical thoughts, which tend to spin off 
in different directions. With a strong desire for 
recognition, they may expend a great deal of 
energy on ideas and speculations, but fail to 
harness it, losing resolve and appearing 
egocentric and lazy . Friends are exasperated 
by their impatience, irritability , and self-
absorption, yet charmed by their generosity , 
naivety , and good humor.
Sensitive to warmth, these people have a 
tendency to become overheated and strip off 
layers of clothing. Sweat, stools, and other 
discharges are often strong-smelling. Heat, 
eating, standing, and washing usually 
aggravate symptoms.
Sulfur  is prescribed to treat a broader range 
of ailments than any other remedy in the 
homeopathic repertory . It is also given to any 
type of person to boost vitality and clear up 
lingering illnesses.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Patches of itchy, red, weepy skin, 
but generally dry, dirty-looking skin. Sulfur  
is used for many skin problems, including 
diaper rash, cradle cap, acne, psoriasis, 
eczema, ringworm, and scabies.  
It is given for bacterial infections such as 
erysipelas, cellulitis, impetigo, and boils;  
for viral infections such as oral and genital 
herpes; and for measles and chicken pox.
Symptoms better  For fresh, warm, dry air;  
for lying on the right side.
Symptoms worse  For a stuffy environment;  for being in a hot bed; for scratching; for 
wearing wool; for washing.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  A bloated stomach with burning 
pains, belching, flatulence, indigestion, and 
a tendency to regurgitate food. Any 
vomiting or diarrhea is worse at 5 a.m., and 
typically alternates with constipation. The 
anus is sore and itchy after passing stools, 
and may develop hemorrhoids. Hunger 
pains and a sinking feeling in the stomach 
may strike at around 11 a.m. Discharges 
such as stools and flatulence have an 
offensive smell.
Symptoms better  For cold foods and drinks;  
for flatulence.
Symptoms worse  For overexertion; for milk.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Painful or irregular menstruation, 
with a burning feeling in the vulva and vagina. 
The vagina may itch, and there may be a white 
or yellow discharge that is typically due to 
thrush. There may be headaches, irritability , and 
insomnia that are linked with premenstrual 
syndrome. Sulfur  may ease the burning pain  
of cystitis, and help treat menopausal dizziness, 
hot flushes, and strong-smelling sweats, 
particularly if these symptoms are accompanied 
by vaginal itching.
Symptoms better  For fresh, warm, dry air;  
for lying on the right side.
Symptoms worse  For a stuffy environment;  
at night.
Men’s health
SYMPTOMS  Impotence or erectile failure 
accompanied by sharp pains in the penis and KEY SYMPTOMS laziness • tendency to overheat • self-centeredness 
• philosophical state of mind • itching • burning pains
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Produced by volcanic activity, and found near 
hot springs and volcanic craters in Sicily and 
the US, and on the Italian peninsula.
BACKGROUND
Used traditionally as a disinfectant, laxative, 
and purgative, to treat skin complaints, 
clear up bronchial catarrh, and ease 
rheumatic pains.
PREPARATION
Sulfur is chemically puriﬁed. The mineral is 
then triturated by grinding it into a ﬁne 
powder that is soluble in water and alcohol.
COMMON NAMES
Sulfur, ﬂowers of sulfur, brimstone, 
sublimated sulfur.
See also  Skin & bones,  pages 192, 240, 268 ; Reproduction,  page 198 ; Children’s health,  page 246 ; Women’s health,  page 256MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
itching in the tip of the penis. Penis or prostate 
inflammation may be helped by the remedy .
Symptoms better  For fresh, warm, dry air;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For heat; at night; for rest.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  A dry , sore throat with a choking 
feeling, swollen tonsils, and hoarseness. Colds 
and coughs are marked by thick, smelly , yellow 
or green catarrh. Coughing disrupts sleep.  
Colds may develop into bronchitis, pleurisy ,  
or pneumonia with chest pains.
Symptoms better  For open air; for dry heat;  
for lying on the right side.
Symptoms worse  At night; in the morning;  
for reclining.In the 9th century BCE the Greek poet Homer used vapors of 
burning sulfur to purify his house. Long used in Chinese and 
Western medicine for skin problems and as an antiseptic, sulfur 
was also given to generations of children in the West as 
brimstone and treacle, a popular tonic to “cleanse” the blood and keep 
the bowels regular. Hahnemann proved the remedy and published it in his Materia 
Medica Pura  (1821–34). It is used chiefly for skin and digestive complaints.SULFUR  The mineral is refined into flowers of 
sulfur which, when burned, produce sulfur dioxide, 
a powerful disinfectant.FLOWERS OF 
SULFUR
SULFUR

100 •
Tartarus stibiatus syn. Antimonium tartaricum
ANTIMONIUM TART.
REMEDY PROFILE
Antimonium tart.  is appropriate for rather 
attention-seeking people who respond well to 
rest, comfort, and reassurance. The remedy 
also suits children who tend to complain 
unless they are carried around.
Illness often exhausts these individuals, 
making them feel restless, generally apathetic, 
and drowsy . Their energy levels may be so low 
that they are unable to cough up mucus and 
seem in danger of suffocating in their own 
secretions. They become irritable and averse 
to being bothered or disturbed by others, and 
dislike being touched or examined.
T ypical symptoms include a lack of thirst, and 
profuse, cold sweat. Antimonium tart.  is used for 
chest complaints, such as whooping cough, that 
are marked by the sound of mucus rattling in 
the chest. It is also given for headaches, nausea 
and vomiting, and skin problems such as acne, 
impetigo, and chicken pox.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  Severe respiratory infection or 
chronic bronchitis with wheezing and rattling 
in the throat and chest due to a build-up of 
mucus. Coughing up mucus becomes difficult 
due to severe fatigue. Fits of coughing may 
alternate with gasping or rapid, shallow 
breathing accompanied by a sensation of 
suffocation. Symptoms may be aggravated by 
irritability or anger.
Symptoms better  For cold air; for sitting up;  
for coughing up mucus.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for damp and 
cold; for lying down; for movement.
Whooping cough
SYMPTOMS  Breathlessness and coughing spasms 
primarily in infants, followed by sleep or nausea and vomiting  (see below) . Mucus causes 
congestion and a rattling sound in the chest.
Symptoms better  For sitting up; for coughing 
up mucus; for vomiting.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for being too hot 
or cold; for lying down; for movement; for 
tantrums; for milk.
Nausea
SYMPTOMS  Persistent nausea with trembling, 
weakness, and fainting. The nausea seems to 
center in the chest or may be felt as a weight 
on the chest; it may be accompanied by 
coughing. There may be vomiting, ineffectual 
retching, and a thick, white coating or red 
streaks on the tongue.
Symptoms better  For cold air; for sitting up;  
for belching; for vomiting.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for damp and 
cold; for lying down; for movement.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Pustular skin eruptions that leave  
a purplish mark when healed. There may be 
warts, or acne with pea-sized pustules. Small, 
fluid-filled blisters and reddened skin may be 
caused by impetigo.
Symptoms better  For cold air; for sitting up.
Symptoms worse  For bathing in cold water;  
in the evening; for lying down.
Chicken pox
SYMPTOMS  Large, blistering, bluish skin 
eruptions that leave a purple scar. The remedy 
is particularly apt when the skin symptoms 
have not developed strongly , but associated 
chest or digestive symptoms have appeared, 
such as a chesty cough with rattling mucus,  
or diarrhea. The tongue is coated white,  
and there may be extreme irritability .
Symptoms better  For cold; for coughing up mucus.KEY SYMPTOMS  loud rattling of mucus in the chest and a suffocating sensation  
• increasing weakness • dislike of physical examination • lack of thirstMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Prepared by combining potassium tartrate 
with oxide of antimony, which is formed by 
the reaction of moist air and antimony ( see 
page 98 ).
BACKGROUND
Traditionally used for medicinal purposes 
in the West for treating intestinal  
worms and fungal infections, and as  
an expectorant.
PREPARATION
The remedy is prepared by triturating 
antimony potassium tartrate with lactose 
sugar and then repeatedly diluting and 
succussing the mixture.
COMMON NAMES
Antimony potassium tartrate, tartar emetic.
See also  Asthma,  page 181Symptoms worse  For warmth; for bathing  
in cold water; for becoming heated in bed;  
in the evening; for lying down.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Pain as if a tight band is 
constricting the head, heightened by 
coughing. There may be weariness, and  
a longing to close the eyes.
Symptoms better  For open air; for bathing in 
cold water; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; at night;  
in the morning; for overeating.Alchemists called this compound “tartar emetic,” and it was traditionally 
prescribed as a powerful emetic. Known as the “prince of evacuants,” it caused 
severe vomiting and was taken to expel intestinal worms. The remedy Antimonium 
tart. was proved in various separate trials by Drs. Hahnemann, Stapf, and Hencke, 
and published in Allen’s Encyclopedia of Pure Materia Medica  (1874–79). It is 
commonly prescribed for strength-sapping illness in the young or elderly .
ANTIMONY POTASSIUM TARTRATE  This compound 
is commonly used as an insecticide and fix to bind 
dyes to textiles and leather.Crystals of antimony  
potassium tartrate are poisonous

•101
ZINC. MET.Zincum metallicum
REMEDY PROFILE
Hard-working individuals who find it hard  
to relax are most suited to Zinc. met.  They  
take on too much responsibility , then become 
stressed. A state of nervous excitement 
follows, which makes them sensitive, 
especially to noise, irritable, and carping.  
This overstimulation saps their vitality and 
can lead to mental and physical exhaustion.
These people tend to be forgetful, feel the cold 
keenly , are prone to anemia, and are notorious 
for complaining when ill. Symptoms tend to 
worsen at night, and twitching persists during 
sleep. Drinking alcohol, especially wine, and 
eating also aggravate symptoms, which tend to 
improve after expelling natural discharges via 
urination, defecation, and menstruation.
T ypical physical symptoms are extreme 
fatigue, weakness, and restless, twitchy , 
trembling limbs, particularly the legs. The 
remedy is used for these conditions, for 
nervous and urogenital disorders, and for 
itchy skin eruptions with fatigue and 
twitching limbs.
Nervous exhaustion
SYMPTOMS  A state of collapse due to overwork, 
stress, or overstimulation, marked by mental 
and physical weakness. The mind is either 
excitable or confused and slow—if asked a 
question, the person may repeat it once or 
twice before its meaning sinks in. Bursting 
headaches may be a feature  (see right) . There 
may be incessant trembling in the limbs due 
to weakness, and restless feet in constant 
motion. The soles of the feet may feel painful. Nervous exhaustion may lead to depression 
marked by moodiness, introversion, and 
irritability . Noise and chatter may be 
intolerable, and anger tends to provoke tears.
Symptoms better  For rubbing the body;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for jarring; for wine.
T witching limbs
SYMPTOMS  Involuntary jerking, twitching, or 
even convulsions, and a pale face. The legs may 
be restless and fidgety , despite great weariness, 
and there may be numb, cold feet and a desire 
to keep the legs moving. Severe spasms may be 
due to chorea or Parkinson’s disease.
Symptoms better  For rubbing the body;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for jarring; for wine.
Urogenital problems
SYMPTOMS  Involuntary urine leakage while 
coughing, laughing, or straining in any way , 
due to stress incontinence. There may be 
complete loss of bladder control during severe 
convulsions  (see above) . Urine retention due  
to nervousness or prostate enlargement may 
also be helped by the remedy , as may 
premature ejaculation.
Symptoms better  For movement.
Symptoms worse  For noise; in the evening; at 
night; for wine.
Eczema & viral skin infections
SYMPTOMS  Red, itchy, weepy, or crusty 
patches of eczema, particularly on the 
insides of the limb joints. Childhood viral KEY SYMPTOMS nervous fatigue or exhaustion • restless feet  
• twitching and trembling • person feels better for expelling 
discharges and developing skin eruptions
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Reﬁned from the ore sphalerite, formed  
in hydrothermal mineral veins in South 
America, the US, and Australasia.
BACKGROUND
Used traditionally as an antiseptic and 
astringent in calamine and other lotions, 
and now in sunscreens to block UV rays.
PREPARATION
Zinc is heated and then ground into a ﬁne 
powder. This is followed by trituration with 
lactose sugar.
COMMON NAME
 Zinc sulﬁde.
See also  Restless legs,  page 230MAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
infections such as chicken pox, measles, and 
German measles may also be helped by 
Zinc. met.  if the rash is slow to appear, if the 
child is mentally and physically weak, and if 
there is involuntary twitching.
Symptoms better  For allowing the rash to weep 
and discharge its fluids; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For noise; for touch; at night.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Pounding, bursting, possibly one-
sided pain in the forehead or the temples, due 
to overwork or nervous exhaustion  (see left) .
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For noise; for touch; for wine.A soft, blue-white metal that does not corrode, zinc is 
used to make galvanized roofing and alloys such as 
brass, a melding of copper and zinc that is used for 
many purposes, including musical instruments. Zinc 
stimulates the production of many proteins in the 
body and is a vital trace element. In conventional 
medicine, zinc oxide cream is applied to ulcers, and given 
as a supplement for tetanus, neuralgia, and convulsions. The 
remedy was proved by Hahnemann in 1828.ZINC 
POWDER
SPHALERITE
Sphalerite takes 
the form of black 
crystalsZINC This trace element, found in sphalerite,  
is vital for a healthy body, although excess 
consumption can cause anemia, weaken the 
immune system, and impair the healing process.



major animal 
remedies
this small but important component of 
the homeopathic materia medica includes 
remedies made from animals, insects, 
animal products or secretions, and 
sterilized bacteria taken from diseased 
tissue. the major animal-based remedies 
are featured in this section.

104 •
Apis mellifera
APIS
REMEDY PROFILE
Homeopaths easily recognize people likely to 
benefit from Apis because, in some ways, their 
behavior echoes that of bees. They tend to be 
fussy , restless, irritable types who are hard to 
please. Frantic hours spent cleaning and 
sorting, sometimes clumsily , often accomplish 
little. A vulnerable side reveals oversensitivity , 
sadness, weepiness, and an aversion to being 
alone. This need for company gives this type 
of person a reputation as a “queen bee” who 
organizes everyone. They reserve a sting in 
their tails for those who upset them. Fiercely 
territorial, they can be highly jealous or 
suspicious of newcomers.
Apis is prescribed generally for symptoms 
that start on the right side and move to the 
left side. Ailments treated with Apis include 
urticaria (hives), insect bites or stings, and 
burns. It is used for urinary infections such  
as cystitis, and for edema or urine retention, 
especially in newborn babies. Inflammation  
of the eyes, mouth, or throat, and fever may 
also be helped.
Urticaria, bites & stings
SYMPTOMS  The skin is itchy , swollen, and 
highly sensitive to touch, with stinging pain. 
It may be puffy and blotchy , with raised 
bumps that seem full of water. Urticaria may 
develop after a chill or fever  (see right) .
Symptoms better  For cool surroundings; for 
washing; for cold compresses on the skin.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for hot, stuffy 
rooms; at night; for touch or pressure on the 
affected area.Cystitis
SYMPTOMS  Burning, stinging pain in the 
urethra and bladder on passing urine.  
The need to urinate is frequent, but only 
meager amounts of urine are passed.  
Kidney inflammation with puffy eyes  
and a lack of thirst may also respond  
to Apis.
Symptoms better  For cool surroundings.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for pressure on  
the bladder.
Edema
SYMPTOMS  Swelling of body tissues due to 
fluid retention. The swelling may be 
associated with arthritis (accompanied by the 
typical burning or stinging pain), meningitis, 
pleurisy , or peritonitis.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for touch or 
pressure on the affected area.
Inflammation of the eyes, lips, 
mouth, or throat
SYMPTOMS  Inflammation of the eyes,  
mouth, or throat. The eyes are red, sore, 
and sensitive to light. They may water 
profusely with hot tears. The mouth and 
throat are swollen, and are subject to 
burning pains. Any swelling in the throat 
may obstruct breathing. There is a marked 
lack of thirst.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses on the 
affected area; for inhaling cool air.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for hot, stuffy 
rooms; for touch.MAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
KEY SYMPTOMS  burning, stinging pains  
• swelling of affected areas • allergic reactions 
• anxious restlessness • jealousy
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Made from the native European honey bee, 
which can today be found throughout Europe 
and in Canada, the US, and many other 
countries.
BACKGROUND
Bee-derived substances such as beeswax 
and honey have long been used in many 
medicinal traditions, including ancient Greek, 
Western, Chinese, and Unani.
PREPARATION
The remedy is made from the whole female 
bee, including the stinger, or from the stinger 
alone. The insect is crushed, dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Honey bee.
See also  Circulation,  page 184 ; Osteoarthritis,  page 196 ; Prostate problems,  page 202 ; Allergies,  page 206 ; Urticaria,  page 242Fever
SYMPTOMS  Fever with a total lack of thirst and 
possible sore throat. There may be a severe 
headache with stabbing pains, in which the 
head feels hot. There may also be chills, and 
the skin is dry and sensitive.
Symptoms better  For cool surroundings;  
for uncovering; for cold compresses.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for hot, stuffy 
rooms; for sleep; for touch or pressure on the 
affected area.A 9,000-year-old cave painting depicting a figure taking  
honey from a hive is the oldest record of our relationship with  
the honey bee. Bees provide us with more than just honey, 
however: beeswax is refined and used in ointments and polishes; 
propolis (a resin collected by bees from tree buds) is used 
medicinally; and royal jelly is taken as a nutritional supplement. 
The homeopathic remedy, proved in 1852 by Dr. Frederick Humphries,  
is often used to treat insect bites and stings.HONEY BEE  Carried only by the female bee, the 
stinger can cause constriction of the airways or even 
collapse in people who are allergic to its poison.Bee’s hairy coat picks 
up and transports 
pollen from flowers

•105
CANTHARISCantharis vesicatoria syn. Lytta vesicatoria
REMEDY PROFILE
Those who benefit most from Cantharis  
usually have high sex drives, which may 
become uncontrollable during certain 
illnesses. They can be restless, querulous, and 
difficult to get along with when ill. Irritability 
or insolence can even explode into paroxysms 
of violence or rage. In extreme cases, this may 
escalate into psychological problems such as 
intense mental confusion or mania.
Cantharis  is prescribed for conditions that 
deteriorate very rapidly . T ypical symptoms are 
loss of appetite, burning pain in the throat or 
stomach, and raging thirst with an aversion to 
drinking, since even a small amount of water 
makes the bladder pain worse.
Burning cystitis and urinary tract 
inflammation are the main disorders for 
which Cantharis  is used. Tenderness in the 
area of the kidneys, renal colic, kidney 
inflammation such as nephritis and 
pyelonephritis, and some other urinary 
disorders may also be eased by the remedy. 
It is given for sunburn, scalds, and burns if 
the skin has blistered, and is also used for 
insect bites and stings. Some digestive-tract 
disorders, such as gastritis, severe diarrhea, 
or dysentery, may respond to the remedy, as 
may an excessive libido.
Severe cystitis
SYMPTOMS  Constant, urgent desire to urinate, 
with violent, spasmodic pains in the lower 
abdomen. Urine is scanty , hot, and bloody , 
and is passed drop by drop, with violent 
burning or cutting pains in the bladder and 
urethra. After urinating there is a sensation 
that the bladder is not actually empty . There may be long-term urine retention, which 
results in a loss of muscle tone in the bladder. 
Inflammation of the genital area may overly 
stimulate the libido  (see below) .
Symptoms better  For warmth; at night.
Symptoms worse  Before, during, and after 
urination; for coffee; for cold drinks.
Burns & scalds
SYMPTOMS  Burns, sunburn, and scalding, if the 
skin blisters. Cantharis  is also prescribed for 
blisters that resemble burns.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for touch.
Insect bites & stings
SYMPTOMS  Unusually sharp pain at the site of 
a sting or bite, which has a black center. 
Anger, restlessness, excitability , or aggravation 
may also be evident after the bite or sting.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for coffee.
Gastritis, diarrhea &  
dysentery
SYMPTOMS  Violent, burning pain, distended 
abdomen, and possibly diarrhea accompanied 
by a scalding sensation. There may be an urge 
to empty the bowels when urinating, a loss of 
appetite, and irritability .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for doubling over; 
at night.
Symptoms worse  During urination; for drinking.
Excessive libido
SYMPTOMS  Uncontrollable, inappropriate 
sexual arousal. An inflamed genital area, due KEY SYMPTOMS burning, cutting pains • urine that passes in drops • very high libido 
with urinary problems • violent behavior • person feels worse for coffee
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Found in southern Europe, notably in Spain 
and southern France, as well as in western 
Asia. Feeds on the leaves of white poplar, 
ash, privet, elder, and lilac trees.
BACKGROUND
Traditionally used for warts, baldness, 
arousing the libido, and inducing 
miscarriage. The Greek “father of medicine,” 
Hippocrates, advocated Spanish ﬂy for 
dropsy in the 5th century BCE.
PREPARATION
Whole, live beetles are killed by heating. 
They are then macerated in alcohol and left 
to stand for ﬁve days, before being ﬁltered, 
diluted, and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Spanish ﬂy, blister beetle.
See also  Irritable bowel syndrome,  page 189 ; Ulcerative colitis,  page 190 ; Cystitis,  page 260MAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
to urinary tract infection, may stimulate sexual 
activity  (see left) . Sexual fantasies may be 
strong enough to disturb sleep.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest; for 
rubbing the genitalia.
Symptoms worse  During urination; during 
sexual intercourse.The iridescent body of this beetle contains an irritant called cantharidine, which 
has a long, if dubious, reputation in traditional medicine, due in part to its alleged 
aphrodisiac properties. If taken in large doses, cantharidine is a powerful poison 
that attacks the urinary system. It causes vomiting, diarrhea, burning pain in the 
stomach and throat, and kidney damage, and can lead ultimately to death. The 
remedy Cantharis , proved by Hahnemann in 1805, is given for complaints 
accompanied by burning pain.
SPANISH FLY  As a form of defense, this beetle 
secretes cantharidine if touched. This active 
chemical causes the skin to blister.

106 •
Carcinosinum
CARCINOSIN
REMEDY PROFILE
Carcinosin  is best suited to people who were 
shy , oversympathetic, and hypersensitive 
during childhood. Such children typically 
suppress their emotions, dislike being 
criticized or scolded, and are easily offended. 
During puberty they may find it difficult to 
contain their sexual feelings. As adults, they 
tend to be passionate, and often become 
workaholics, continually pushing themselves 
to the limit. They may have a great desire for 
travel and excitement. Their yearning for deep 
fulfilment may lead to exhaustion and illness.
People who benefit most from the remedy 
may have a strong craving for fatty foods, 
especially butter and chocolate. Physical 
symptoms may be positively or negatively 
affected by being at the seaside. These people 
generally feel better for dancing or when 
listening to music. Their symptoms may be 
relieved by lying with the knees drawn up to 
the elbows.
Carcinosin  may be prescribed for those who 
have a personal or family history of cancer, 
diabetes, or tuberculosis. In some cases the 
remedy may even be used in the treatment of 
the actual diseases. The remedy also has an 
affinity with those who have a history of 
emotional stress, or who are recovering from 
chronic fatigue syndrome or mononucleosis.
Chronic fatigue syndrome
SYMPTOMS  Weakness and exhaustion, 
associated with tenderness in the muscles. 
This is often accompanied by dizziness, numbness, and nausea. Frequent colds and 
recurrent acute illnesses are common 
characteristic traits. There may be depression 
and a loss of concentration. This condition 
may arise following a bout of mononucleosis.
Symptoms better  For short naps; in the 
evening; at the seaside; for lying with the knees 
drawn up to the elbows.
Symptoms worse  For physical exertion; for 
damp, clammy surroundings; for undressing.
Insomnia
SYMPTOMS  Chronic inability to sleep soundly , 
especially if the pattern has been apparent 
since childhood. This insomnia is particularly 
associated with prolonged periods of 
emotional stress, with some form of rejection 
often the root cause of the problem. Stimuli 
such as thunderstorms may cause excitement 
and prevent sleep.
Symptoms better  In the evening; for short naps.
Symptoms worse  For physical exertion;  
during thunderstorms.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  Bronchitis with a cough that develops 
from a tickle in the throat. There may also be 
asthma and a feeling of constriction in the chest.
Symptoms better  In the evening; for short naps.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for talking; for 
laughing; for running; for undressing.
Abdominal pain
SYMPTOMS  Abdominal pain with dry , hard 
stools and burning pain on the right side of 
the colon. There may be constipation, which KEY SYMPTOMS  workaholic, passionate nature • conditions that are affected  
by being at the seaside • desire for travel • desire for butter and chocolate  
• sleeping difficultiesMAJOR MINERAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Carcinosin  is a nosode, a remedy made from 
diseased tissue ( see page 20 ). It is 
prepared from cancerous tissue, which is 
commonly taken from the breast.
BACKGROUND
Breast cancer is one of the most common 
forms of cancer in women. Most malignant 
breast tumors are found in the upper, outer 
part of the breast.
PREPARATION
The prepared specimen of cancerous tissue 
is sterilized and then dissolved in puriﬁed 
water. This mixture is then repeatedly diluted 
and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Cancerous breast tissue.
See also  Allergies,  page 206is typically associated with a desire for fatty 
foods such as chocolate.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the 
abdomen; for bending forward; for hot drinks.
Symptoms worse  Between 4 p.m. and 6 p.m.
Skin growths & blemishes
SYMPTOMS  Multiple moles and blemishes, acne 
on the back and chest, or boils. There may be 
itching and a tendency to bruise or bleed easily .
Symptoms better  In the evening.
Symptoms worse  For undressing.This homeopathic remedy is made from cancerous tissue, usually obtained from 
the breast. Cancer is the second most common cause of death in the Western 
world (after heart disease). The development of a homeopathic remedy derived 
from cancerous tissue is attributed to two British homeopaths, Dr. Compton Burnett 
and Dr. Clarke, who first proved the remedy in the late 19th century . Its uses have 
widened considerably following work by Dr. D. M. Foubister of the Royal London 
Homeopathic Hospital and research published by the US homeopath Dr. J. Shore in 
1989. Carcinosin  is thought to be particularly beneficial for noncancerous conditions in 
people who have a strong family history of cancer.CANCER  The potential of cancer tissue, which is 
used curatively only in the field of homeopathy, is 
only now being fully explored.Malignant cancer 
cell exists as 
parasite in bodyCancer cell divides 
more rapidly than 
normal body cells

•107
CROTALUSCrotalus horridus horridus
REMEDY PROFILE
Those who respond best to Crotalus  tend to be 
sluggish and melancholic. They are prone to 
forgetfulness, and may lose their way in their 
own neighborhood, or even forget the names 
of close friends. An aversion to family 
members is typical of these people, and a 
desire for meat, especially pork, is common.
Crotalus  is considered to help stop bleeding 
from any orifice, making it highly useful for 
hemorrhaging. It is given following the onset 
of a state of total collapse, which may be  
due to a severe septic state, a stroke, or  
a heart attack. In addition, it may help  
cases of delirium, throat infection, or  
retinal hemorrhage.
Bleeding
SYMPTOMS  Copious bleeding from any orifice. 
The remedy is especially effective for slow 
bleeding, or for thin, dark blood that does not 
clot well. It may seem as though blood is 
present in the perspiration or tears. The 
bleeding may be associated with a state of 
collapse or severe infection. Crotalus  is used 
for septicemia with hemorrhaging where the 
breakdown of red blood cells is so great that 
the liver becomes overwhelmed, leading to the 
onset of serious conditions such as jaundice.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for light;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left side; for 
wearing tight clothes.
Stroke
SYMPTOMS  Weakness or total collapse after a 
stroke. There may be paralysis or impaired function in the limbs, which is generally right-
sided and accompanied by pain that extends 
down to the left hand. Other symptoms may 
include retinal hemorrhaging and nosebleeds. 
There may be signs of delirium  (see below) .
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for light.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left side.
Heart disorders
SYMPTOMS  Partial or total collapse following 
angina or a heart attack. There may be 
weakness, fainting, and pain that is worse on 
the left side of the body and that possibly 
extends down the arm to the left hand. There 
may be great reluctance to move due to a 
feeling that something is going to burst 
underneath the breastbone.
Symptoms better  For light.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left side; for 
climbing up steps, or walking up a hill or slope.
Delirium
SYMPTOMS  Confused and disordered thoughts 
as a result of a serious infection, stroke, or 
heart attack. There may be irritability , anxiety , 
and an inability to answer questions. Insomnia 
is another possible symptom: those affected 
may suddenly jump out of bed and try to run 
away , muttering and babbling. These 
symptoms may also be associated with the 
delirium tremens caused by alcoholism.
Symptoms better  For light; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For falling asleep; on waking; 
for alcohol.
Throat infections
SYMPTOMS  Inflammation or infection of the 
throat, often due to laryngitis or tonsillitis. KEY SYMPTOMS bleeding, possibly from every orifice • septicemia or 
even septic shock • aversion to tight collars
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Native range, like that of many other species 
of rattlesnakes, is Canada, the US, and 
South America. Found in arid terrain and 
desert areas.
BACKGROUND
Venom “milked” from live snakes is used to 
make antivenins, which trigger production of 
antibodies that neutralize the poison from a 
snakebite.
PREPARATION
 Venom obtained from a live snake by 
“milking” it is dropped onto lactose sugar. 
The resulting mixture is then triturated.
COMMON NAMES
Rattlesnake, pit viper.
See also  Cancer,  page 208MAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
The pain is particularly sharp on the left 
side of the throat, and is often accompanied 
by a dry, irritating cough. Another 
characteristic symptom linked with Crotalus  
is soreness in the throat with associated 
difficulty in swallowing.
Symptoms better  For being in fresh air.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left side; for 
clothing that is tight around the neck.The Latin name for the rattlesnake derives from the 
Greek krotalon , meaning “rattle” or “castanet.” This is 
due to the distinctive rattling sound made by the 
snake’s tail, which vibrates at 50 beats per second as 
the creature prepares to strike its prey . The remedy , 
proved by the US homeopath Dr. Constantine Hering in 
1837, is prescribed primarily for a range of serious disorders, 
including hemorrhaging, angina, strokes, and infection.
RATTLESNAKE  This venomous snake is also called 
the pit viper, due to the heat-sensitive pit between 
its eyes and nostrils that it uses to locate its prey.Snake may shed its 
skin two or three 
times a year

108 • 108 •
Lac caninum
LAC CAN.
REMEDY PROFILE
Those who benefit most from Lac can.  tend  
to lack self-confidence or feel self-contempt. 
Often restless and nervous, they may be 
highly sensitive to sensory stimulation. An 
active imagination and excitable nature 
combine to engender irrational fears that may 
develop into phobias. They may be prone to 
bouts of depression.
A typical symptom in those who respond to 
Lac can.  is a feeling of “otherworldliness,” as if 
the self is floating just above or behind the 
body , or a sensation that is often described as 
“floating on air.”
Lac can.  is used for irrational phobias and  
for acute sensory hypersensitivity . The remedy is 
also considered particularly effective for the 
throat, the nervous system, and the female 
reproductive system. In all conditions, 
symptoms tend to move from site to site  
around the afflicted area of the body .
Throat infections
SYMPTOMS  Excessive dryness in the throat. 
Burning pain makes swallowing difficult. 
The pain alternates from side to side, and 
may extend to the ears. The saliva is of a 
viscous consistency, and the back of the 
throat may be lined with a silvery film. 
Symptoms may coincide with menstruation 
if they are caused by tonsillitis.
Symptoms better  For being in fresh air;  
for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For touch.
Phobias
SYMPTOMS  Irrational fears, usually of snakes, 
storms, dogs, or disease. The fear of snakes is particularly strong, and may be  
associated with a sensation as though snakes 
are crawling all over and around the body. 
There may be hypochondria and a constant 
desire to wash the hands. Anxiety and  
fear may trigger hysteria, with possible 
aggressive behavior.
Symptoms better  For being in fresh air.
Symptoms worse  For touch.
Breast problems
SYMPTOMS  Swollen, sore breasts prior to 
menstruation. Pain switches from side to 
side. In breast-feeding mothers, breast milk 
may be lacking or suppressed, or milk 
production may be excessive. The breasts 
are painful and feel as though they are full 
of hard lumps. There may be a desire to 
hold the breasts firmly.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for being in  
fresh air; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for the slightest 
movement; for going up and down stairs.
Vaginal bleeding & discharge
SYMPTOMS  Bleeding between menstrual 
periods or following sexual intercourse.  
A vaginal discharge may accompany 
bleeding, particularly before menstruation. 
The genitalia are very sensitive to touch or 
pressure, including that of bathing or the 
friction of clothes. Sexual intercourse may 
be painful, and during orgasm hysteria may 
develop. The libido may be sharply 
increased or reduced.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for being in  
fresh air; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for  
movement.KEY SYMPTOMS  pain that alternates from side to side • fear of snakes  
• great sensitivity • lack of confidence • swollen breasts before 
menstruation • sensitivity to touchMAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
The milk from any nursing bitch may be 
used, although in practice mongrels are 
used most often.
BACKGROUND
Ancient Romans used remedies derived 
from bitch’s milk for ovarian pains, and for 
uterine and cervical problems.
PREPARATION
Fresh milk from a nursing mongrel bitch is 
expressed and diluted in a mix of alcohol 
and water for the tincture.
COMMON NAME
Bitch’s milk.
See also  Phobias,  page 211 ; Sore throat,  page 226 ; Breast pain,  page 258Hypersensitivity
SYMPTOMS  Mental hypersensitivity due to an 
overactive imagination. A hysterical state 
may develop; this may involve seeing faces 
and hearing noises that do not exist. Parts 
of the body, such as the genitalia, are also 
physically hypersensitive. Touch is felt 
acutely, and there may be an urge to keep 
the legs or fingers apart to avoid skin-to-
skin contact. Absent-mindedness and 
hypochondria may accompany this state.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for being in fresh 
air; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for movement;  
for cold air.Since the era of ancient Rome, the milk of nursing female dogs has been 
put to medicinal use. In the 1st century CE the Roman naturalist Pliny the 
Elder advocated it for allaying certain disorders of the female reproductive 
system. The Greek physician Sextus used it in the 3rd century CE for 
treating light-intolerance and inflammation of the inner ear. The homeopathic 
remedy Lac. can.  was proved in 1888 by Drs. Swan and Berridge.
BITCH’S MILK  Before the discovery of a vaccine  
for diphtheria, bitch’s milk was commonly  
used to treat the disease.

•109
LACHESISLachesis muta syn. Trigonocephalus lachesis
REMEDY PROFILE
Those most responsive to this remedy tend to 
be ambitious, creative, perceptive, talkative 
people who live life to the fullest. If they 
believe in an ideology , they have a tendency to 
follow it dogmatically . Their intensity may 
cause them to become fanatical about religion  
or sex. Being confined in any way is  
anathema to them, whether physically by 
tight, restrictive clothing, or emotionally  
by commitment in a relationship.  
A tendency to become overstimulated by  
their intense lifestyle may lead to physical  
and mental “congestion” that makes it hard to 
control their emotions. Egocentric, cruel,  
and wildly jealous behavior may result.  
They also slip easily into depression and 
extreme loquacity .
Conditions treated by this remedy usually 
appear on the left side. The symptoms tend to 
develop or worsen during sleep. Energy levels 
fluctuate. Physical symptoms are eased by 
expelling natural discharges such as menstrual 
blood or gas (while suppressing them can 
cause discomfort or pain). Similarly , releasing 
“emotional discharges” brings relief.
Lachesis  is often used for hot flashes that 
occur during menopause, premenstrual 
syndrome, and certain nervous disorders. The 
remedy is also prescribed for a sore throat, 
poor circulation, varicose veins, and certain 
vascular conditions such as angina.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Menopausal hot flashes, perhaps with 
fainting spells, palpitations, and hot sweats. 
Lachesis  is also used for painful menstruation or 
premenstrual syndrome with hot flashes, a left-
sided headache, and violent mood swings.  The symptoms may disrupt sleep and improve 
with the onset of menstruation.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for 
menstruating; for expelling natural discharges; 
for eating.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for sleep; upon 
waking; for touch; for the pressure of tight clothes.
Spasms & tremors
SYMPTOMS  Muscle spasms, tremors, and 
weakness in the limbs. Spasms may be 
triggered by the slightest touch, and may be 
accompanied by fainting or convulsions. 
These symptoms may be linked to alcoholism, 
fever, multiple sclerosis, petit mal epilepsy , or 
even brain damage following a stroke.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for expelling 
natural discharges; for movement; for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for sleep; for touch; 
on the left side; for the menopause; for alcohol 
or hot drinks.
Poor circulation & varicose 
veins
SYMPTOMS  Poor circulation that turns the face, 
ears, and extremities blue or purple. Any 
wounds bleed very easily , with even a pin-
prick oozing great drops of blood. Lachesis  
may also be used for varicose veins that are 
engorged and bluish-purple in color.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for expelling 
natural discharges; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For lying on the left side; for 
touch; for the pressure of tight clothes.
Sore throat
SYMPTOMS  Swollen, dark purple throat, 
predominantly on the left side, with splinterlike 
pain that may spread to the ears. Air or liquids 
seem more painful to swallow than solids.KEY SYMPTOMS  zealous temperament • loquacity  
• conditions that generally appear on the left side  
• person feels better for expelling discharges
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
A deadly member of the rattlesnake family. 
Native territory is South America, and 
preferred habitat tends to be the wooded 
areas of tropical regions.
BACKGROUND
“Milked” from the live snake, the 
bushmaster’s venom is used to make  
an antivenin for people bitten by it. The 
antivenin helps counteract the effects  
of the bite.
PREPARATION
Venom is “milked” from the bushmaster 
snake before being dissolved in alcohol.  
The mixture is then repeatedly diluted  
and succussed.
COMMON NAMES
Bushmaster snake, surucucu.
See also Multiple sclerosis,  page 179 ; Palpitations,  page 186 ; Rosacea,  page 193 ; Reproduction,  page 198 , 258; Emotions,  page 210MAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for expelling 
natural discharges; for loosening clothes.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for sleep; upon 
waking; for constriction around the neck; for 
swallowing fluids.
Heart disorders
SYMPTOMS  Cramping pains in the chest, with a 
rapid, irregular, weak pulse and possible 
palpitations. There may be a strange sensation 
as though the heart has swollen and become 
too large for the body . Further accompanying 
symptoms typically include anxiety and 
cyanosis (bluish lips, tongue, and extremities).
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for expelling 
natural discharges; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for lying on the left 
side; for sleep; for any constriction around the 
throat or chest; for touch.Known as “surucucu” by indigenous South American peoples, the 
bushmaster is a highly poisonous snake whose venom inhibits nerve impulses  
in the heart, destroys red blood cells, and interferes with clotting. One bite directly 
into a vein can cause almost instant death. The remedy , proved by Dr. Constantine 
Hering in 1828, is given mainly for vascular and circulatory conditions.BUSHMASTER SNAKE  Unusually, this member of 
the rattlesnake family is an aggressive hunter, with 
an extremely loud rattle and highly lethal venom.

110 • 110 •
Medorrhinum
MEDORRHINUM
REMEDY PROFILE
Medorrhinum  is best suited to people who feel 
hurried and anxious, yet simultaneously 
isolated and empty , in a dreamlike, detached 
state. They are passionate and experience life 
to the limit. Behavioral extremes are not 
uncommon, ranging from a withdrawn, 
aesthetically sensitive state to an egotistical, 
selfish one.
Physical symptoms typically center on 
mucous membranes, which are prone to 
infection. Symptoms are generally better  
for a discharge of mucus, for sea air, and in 
the evening. In damp weather, and between  
3 a.m. and 4 a.m., they tend to worsen.  
A thirst for cold drinks and cravings for meat, 
fish, salt, sweets, and unripe foods are 
common, as is an aversion to “slimy” foods 
such as eggplant or oysters.
Medorrhinum  is prescribed for infections  
of the urinary tract, reproductive system, 
genitals, and respiratory tract. It is also  
a remedy for asthma, and may be especially 
effective for those who have a personal  
or family history of gonorrhea or early  
heart disease.
Urinary-tract infections
SYMPTOMS  Sharp, burning pain on urinating, 
perhaps with a yellow, pus-filled discharge or 
blood in the urine (indicative of nonspecific 
urethritis), or with a frequent urge to urinate, 
if cystitis is the cause. In severe cases, kidney 
infections such as renal colic may follow. In 
men, if accompanied by pain in the abdomen, 
lower back, rectum, or testicles, fever, and  
a urinal discharge, symptoms may be due  
to prostatitis  (see right) .Symptoms better  For kneeling on all fours;  
for lying on the abdomen; in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for passing 
urine; for movement.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Profuse, foul-smelling menstrual 
flow, and an acrid, thick vaginal discharge 
with a fishy odor. There may be marked 
sensitivity near the cervix, tenderness in the 
breasts and nipples, and even sterility .
Symptoms better  For kneeling on all fours; for 
lying on the abdomen; in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for passing 
urine; for movement.
Testicular pain
SYMPTOMS  Prostatitis with an enlarged, painful, 
heavy prostate gland. The urethra may be 
inflamed and tender with a foul-smelling 
discharge, and there may be impotency .
Symptoms better  For kneeling on all fours;  
for lying on the abdomen; in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for passing 
urine; for movement.
Genital warts & herpes
SYMPTOMS  Cauliflower-like, pink warts on the 
genitals. A sore, itchy rash of small genital 
blisters bursting to leave painful ulcers is 
indicative of herpes.
Symptoms better  For kneeling on all fours; for 
lying on the abdomen; in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for passing 
urine; for movement.
Rhinitis, sinusitis & asthma
SYMPTOMS  Burning, profuse catarrh, which is 
associated with inflammation of the mucous KEY SYMPTOMS behavioral extremes • hurried feeling • extremely passionate nature  
• person feels better for lying on the abdomen and in the eveningMAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Discharge from the gonorrhea bacterium, 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae , which commonly 
infects the mucous membranes of the 
vagina or urethra.
BACKGROUND
Worldwide, one of the most common 
sexually transmitted diseases, now treated 
with antibiotics; earlier forms of treatment 
included silver nitrate injections.
PREPARATION
Urethral discharge from a male patient 
infected with gonorrhea is diluted in puriﬁed 
water and succussed to make the 
homeopathic remedy.
COMMON NAME
Gonorrhea.
See also Asthma,  page 181 ; Rheumatoid arthritis,  page 197 ; Candidiasis,  page 200membranes in the nose. There may be 
rhinitis, with postnasal drip (mucus that 
drips down the back of the throat) and 
frequent sneezing. Pressure and aching  
in the sinuses may develop into sinusitis. 
Asthma may occur, and is typically better 
for lying on the abdomen and sticking out 
the tongue. There may be a cough that is 
also better for lying on the abdomen, and 
aggravated by sweet foods and drinks.  
A further symptom is sore, watering eyes 
that may develop conjunctivitis.
Symptoms better  For sea air; for lying on the 
abdomen and sticking out the tongue.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; during  
the day.Galen, the famous Greek physician active in the 2nd century CE, gave gonorrhea 
its name, from gonos , or “seed,” and rhoia , or “flow.” It is thought that the disease 
predates ancient Greece, however, and was known in ancient Egypt and China. 
Widespread by the 18th century , gonorrhea was considered a major underlying 
cause of illness, described by Hahnemann as a “miasm”  (see page 20) . The remedy , 
derived from a “nosode”  (see page 20)  of the infection itself, was proved by  
Dr. Swan and published in Allen’s Materia Medica of Nosodes  (1880–90).GONORRHEA  Transmitted via sexual contact,  
this infection invades the reproductive system  
and can cause sterility if left untreated.Bacterium  
called Neisseria  
gonorrhoeae   
transmits infection

•111
PSORINUMPsorinum
REMEDY PROFILE
There is characteristically an anxious, rather 
unambitious air to those for whom Psorinum  is 
best suited. They are prone to feeling somewhat 
abandoned, forsaken, and pessimistic.
Lack of stamina is a typical trait. These people 
generally possess weak constitutions, proving 
easy prey to infections and viruses. Recovery 
from any illness is slow . Often worse in wintry 
weather, they tend to feel the cold sharply , even 
in summer, wrapping up to avoid a chill since it 
aggravates their symptoms, but they can also feel 
worse for strong heat. Despite a huge appetite, 
they are usually thin. They have an increased 
sense of well-being just before the onset of 
illness, but when ill are prey to morbid fears that 
they will not recover.
Skin, bowel, or respiratory tract disorders 
are the primary conditions for which Psorinum  
is prescribed, generally when the underlying 
vitality is poor.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Pus-filled pimples, crusting, scaly 
eruptions, or itchy , blistered patches of skin. 
The skin always looks dirty , even after cleansing. 
Pimples are often pus-filled acne, appearing 
on the face, neck, scalp, and hairline. 
Prevalence is especially common in teenagers 
(acne vulgaris) and middle-aged women (acne 
rosacea). Scaly eruptions are typically due to 
eczema, producing large areas of weeping skin 
or itchy , scaly patches of skin that may blister 
and are prone to infection and suppuration, 
producing a foul-smelling yellow discharge.
Symptoms better  For washing; for warm clothing.
Symptoms worse  For overheating from exertion.Diarrhea
SYMPTOMS  Diarrhea with spasmodic abdominal 
cramps, and a strong appetite but no weight 
gain. If accompanied by a distended abdomen, 
excessive flatulence, and a feeling of incomplete 
evacuation during bowel movements, 
symptoms may indicate irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS), and may also include bouts  
of constipation. Stools are foul-smelling, fluid, 
gushing, dark, and bloody . Accompanying 
symptoms may include a headache,  
and mucus and a burning sensation in  
the rectum.
Symptoms better  For moderate temperatures.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for heat; in the early 
morning; for coffee.
Respiratory illness
SYMPTOMS  Recurrent acute respiratory 
infections with offensive-smelling catarrh and 
breathlessness. Sinus infection is common, as 
is bronchitis or a cough accompanied by great 
fatigue. Symptoms typical of the hay fever  
and asthma that may respond to Psorinum   
are coughing, breathlessness, and wheezing,  
often exacerbated by exercise or cold weather. 
There may be an associated eye or ear 
infection  (see below) .
Symptoms better  For moderate temperatures; 
for lying on the back with the arms outstretched 
and head low.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for open air;  
for cold drinks.
Eye & ear infections
SYMPTOMS  Painful styes with yellow pus, or an 
eye infection such as conjunctivitis, which 
causes inflamed eyelids and a yellowy KEY SYMPTOMS  despair and pessimism • sense of being forsaken • chilliness  
• offensive-smelling discharges • constant hunger
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Scabies mite, or Sarcoptes scabiei , eats 
into the skin to lay eggs. Its saliva is highly 
irritating, causing ﬂuid-ﬁlled blisters on the 
skin. This ﬂuid is used for the remedy.
BACKGROUND
Transmitted via skin contact, scabies is 
highly contagious and found worldwide. It is 
treated by applying insecticide lotion to the 
entire surface area of the skin.
PREPARATION
Fluid is drawn by syringe from a scabies 
blister on the skin of an infected person. It 
is sterilized, dissolved in puriﬁed water, then 
diluted and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Scabies.
See also Rosacea,  page 193 ; Severe eczema,  page 194 ; Phobias,  page 211 ; Skin problems,  page 268MAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
discharge. Ear infections such as otitis media 
or otitis externa may also be helped by the 
remedy if there is a foul-smelling discharge.
Symptoms better  For moderate temperatures.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for open air.
Depression
SYMPTOMS  Profound fear of personal failure, 
poverty , and death, with a pessimistic belief 
that life holds no promise. Feelings of intense 
loneliness and abandonment may lead to 
despair and suicidal thoughts.
Symptoms better  For warm surroundings;  
for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for coffee.SCABIES MITE  Once the female mite has eaten her 
way into the skin, she lays eggs that hatch and 
cause infestation.In Latin, scabere  means “to scratch.” From this is derived the name of the 
scabies mite, which tunnels into the skin and causes an itchy , blistering 
infection. Hahnemann believed that scabies infection reflected a more deep-
seated, underlying disease, or “miasm,” in his patients  (see page 20) , which could 
be revealed and healed by treatment. He proved the homeopathic remedy , Psorinum,  
from a “nosode”  (see page 20)  of the infection, although it was not published until it 
was re-proved by Hering in 1831. Psorinum  is given mainly for skin, bowel, and 
respiratory tract complaints.

112 •
Sepia officinalis
SEPIA
REMEDY PROFILE
Sepia  is best suited to people who are irritable 
with loved ones but extroverted in company . 
They often appear opinionated, detached, and 
hard, detesting sympathy and disguising their 
vulnerability . There is typically a sense of 
sagging or drooping. Despite weepiness, 
crying does not bring relief.
These individuals typically prefer sour foods 
and drinks, sweet foods, and alcohol, but 
dislike milk and pork.
Sepia  is chiefly linked with the vagina, 
uterus, and ovaries. It is used for menopause, 
premenstrual syndrome (PMS), and some 
pregnancy-related ailments. Indigestion  
may also be helped, as may headaches, 
catarrh, discolored, itchy skin, and  
circulatory problems.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Sepia may be used for hormone 
imbalances linked to PMS, and for thrush, heavy , 
painful menstruation, and menopause. T ypical 
symptoms may include a dislike of being 
touched, particularly before menstruation, 
during menopause, or if there are associated 
emotional problems. Before, during, and after 
pregnancy , emotional and physical ailments such 
as nausea and fatigue may be helped by the 
remedy . Sexual intercourse may seem painful, 
prompting an aversion to it. There may be 
intense abdominal pressure and stress 
incontinence on laughing or coughing, which 
may be an indicator of a prolapsed uterus.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for exercise; for 
crossing the legs; for being occupied; for sleep; 
for eating.
Symptoms worse  In the early morning; in the 
early evening; for thundery weather; for lying on 
the left side; for fatigue.Fatigue
SYMPTOMS  Emotional and physical exhaustion. 
The back and sides may ache, and the muscles 
may feel weak.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for fresh air; for 
sleep; for being occupied; for vigorous exercise.
Symptoms worse  In the early morning;  
in the early evening; for thundery weather;  
before menstruation.
Digestive disorders
SYMPTOMS  Indigestion and flatulence, with an 
abdomen that feels tender and empty , even after 
eating. There may be constipation, with a feeling 
as if a lump is in the rectum. Vomiting and 
nausea may also occur, notably in pregnancy .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for vigorous 
exercise; for sleep.
Symptoms worse  For fatigue; for lying on the  
left side.
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  Headaches that are particularly 
prevalent on the left side, possibly with 
nausea, dizziness, and hair loss.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for being in fresh 
air; for sleep; for eating.
Symptoms worse  In the early morning; in the 
early evening; for lying on the left side;  
before menstruation.
Catarrh
SYMPTOMS  Salty-tasting catarrh caused by an 
allergy or cold accompanied by a cough.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for fresh air; for 
sitting up.
Symptoms worse  At night; during sleep.
Skin conditions
SYMPTOMS  Discolored, itchy patches,  
and a yellowy brown “saddle,” or chloasma, KEY SYMPTOMS chilliness • weepiness • irritability • indifference • aversion to sexual 
intercourse • craving for sour foodsMAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Found mainly in the Mediterranean Sea, the 
preferred habitat of the cuttleﬁsh is near the 
bottom of waters close to the shore.
BACKGROUND
In ancient Greece, cuttleﬁsh ink was used 
medicinally as a treatment for gonorrhea 
and kidney stones.
PREPARATION
Cuttleﬁsh ink is dried to a crystalline form 
and then triturated with lactose sugar.
COMMON NAME
Cuttleﬁsh.
See also  Palpitations,  page 186 ; Skin,  pages 192 , 242; Reproduction,  page 198 ; Emotional problems,  page 210 ; Women’s health,  page 256across the nose and cheeks, especially  
during pregnancy .
Symptoms better  For fresh air.
Symptoms worse  Before menstruation;  
in pregnancy.
Poor circulation
SYMPTOMS  Varicose veins, or hot and  
cold flashes, especially during  
menopause.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for exercise;  
for eating.
Symptoms worse  In the early morning; in the 
early evening; before menstruation; during  
menopause.Cuttlefish ink, also known as sepia, is used to make a dark brown pigment 
traditionally used by painters and printers. In 1834 Hahnemann proved the 
homeopathic remedy, after observing the apathy and depression experienced 
by an artist friend who frequently licked his sepia-soaked paintbrush while 
painting. Sepia  is predominantly prescribed to treat women’s health problems, 
especially during or before menstrual periods, or throughout menopause.CUTTLEFISH  Related  
to the octopus and  
squid, this mollusk 
camouflages itself by  
changing color and  
protects itself by squirting  
its brownish black ink  
when threatened.INK
CUTTLEFISH

•113
SYPHILINUMSyphilinum
REMEDY PROFILE
Syphilinum  is most effective for people with poor 
memory and concentration. Often highly 
anxious, possibly with obsessive or compulsive 
tendencies, they may also have a dependency on 
alcohol, drugs, or tobacco. Great destructiveness 
is a key factor, as is a strong fear of disease, 
possibly culminating in suicidal feelings. 
Symptoms of physical destruction may be 
evident, often with ulcers and bone pains and 
distortions. Generally , symptoms appear and 
disappear gradually , and are worse at night. 
Alcohol is often craved.
Physical ailments most often treated with 
Syphilinum  include ulcers, asthma, 
constipation, menstrual problems, eye 
inflammation, and headaches.
Ulcers
SYMPTOMS  Recurrent boils, abscesses, and 
suppurations linked to chronic ulceration,  
often appearing on the groin. They discharge 
pus but are relatively painless. Mouth ulcers 
with excessive salivation may be helped by  
the remedy .
Symptoms better  During the day.
Symptoms worse  At night; for extreme heat  
or cold.
Asthma
SYMPTOMS  Wheezing and breathlessness, 
which may be accompanied by a dry cough 
and tightness in the chest.
Symptoms better  For warm, wet, damp 
weather; during thunderstorms; for breathing 
mountain air; for lying down.
Symptoms worse  At night.Constipation
SYMPTOMS  Obstinate, sluggish bowels, 
recurring over many years. There may  
be spasms in the rectum, possibly with  
a feeling that the rectum is too tight to  
pass stools.
Symptoms better  For walking slowly.
Symptoms worse  At night.
Obsessive-compulsive  
behavior
SYMPTOMS  Obsessive or compulsive behavior, 
such as obsessively washing the hands, and 
generally great anxiety . Substance abuse may 
be an associated feature. There may be 
destructive tendencies that extend to the self, 
possibly leading to suicidal thoughts.
Symptoms better  During the day.
Symptoms worse  At night.
Menstrual problems  
& miscarriage
SYMPTOMS  Painful, scanty menstrual periods. 
Menstrual blood has an offensive odor.  
A vaginal discharge may also be evident, and 
it is generally unpleasant-smelling, watery , 
acrid, and profuse. Frequent miscarriage is 
another ailment for which Syphilinum  may  
be prescribed.
Symptoms better  During the day.
Symptoms worse  At night.
Eye inflammation
SYMPTOMS  Inflamed iris or conjunctiva, 
perhaps due to an ulcer on the cornea. 
Discharges with pus or mucus may occur.
Symptoms better  During the day.
Symptoms worse  At night.KEY SYMPTOMS compulsive behavior • ulcers and destruction of body tissues  
• conditions that are worse at night • craving for alcohol
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Caused by the Treponema pallidum  
bacterium, the disease is often spread by 
sexual intercourse, via mucous membranes 
or broken skin.
BACKGROUND
Originally treated using mercury and 
arsenic, which were ineffective and almost 
as dangerous as syphilis itself. Now treated 
with penicillin.
PREPARATION
A swab of the serum that coats a syphilis 
chancre (ulcer) is ﬁrst sterilized and 
dissolved in puriﬁed water, then diluted  
and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Syphilis.
See also  Asthma,  page 181 ; Mouth ulcers,  page 233 ; Constipation,  page 238 ; Painful periods,  page 256MAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
Headaches
SYMPTOMS  An ache that feels as if it is deep in the 
brain, accompanied by pain over the right eye. 
The pain is worse for sticking out the tongue.
Symptoms better  During the day.
Symptoms worse  At night.Legend relates that syphilis takes its name from a 16th-century poem by the 
Italian poet Fracastoro, which portrayed a shepherd named Syphilus as the first 
victim of the disease. Also known as the “French disease.” The incidence of 
syphilis reached epidemic proportions at the end of the 15th century , then fell 
dramatically after the development of penicillin. After initial infection, symptoms 
may disappear for years, but left untreated will eventually ravage the body . The 
remedy Syphilinum  was proved by the homeopath Dr. Samuel Swan and published 
in Henry C. Allen’s Materia Medica of Nosodes  (1880–90).SYPHILIS  This infection begins as a painless  
ulcer, but over the years develops into a  
highly destructive disease .
Bacterium called 
Treponema pallidum  
spreads diseaseBacterium is 
spiral-shaped

114 •
Tarentula hispanica syn. Lycosa tarentula
TARENTULA
REMEDY PROFILE
Those who respond best to Tarentula   
often exhibit signs of hyperactivity, 
overstimulation, and extreme sensitivity to 
music. They are full of energy, with a 
constant sense of hurry, impatience, and 
physical and mental restlessness. A classic 
symptom is mood swings, where laughter 
and happiness are rapidly replaced by 
violent, destructive rage and a marked 
tendency to be manipulative.
When ill, these people tend to roll from 
side to side in an attempt to ease their 
symptoms. Their constant restlessness makes 
them unable to remain still for any length of 
time. They often crave salty or spicy foods, 
and may have a strong aversion to meat.
Tarentula  is most commonly prescribed to 
treat extreme anger and mood swings, restless 
limbs and chorea (also called St. Vitus’ dance), 
and certain heart problems. It is also given for 
some ailments affecting women’s health and 
hyperactivity , particularly in children.
Mood swings
SYMPTOMS  Sudden mood changes switching 
from gaiety to starkly negative moods  
that are marked by quarrelsome, angry, 
ungrateful behavior. There is a tendency  
to exhibit extreme sensitivity to music, 
erratic behavior, or sudden, violent, 
destructive actions such as smashing 
something, laughing, and then apologizing.
Symptoms better  For music; for relaxation; for 
massage; for smoking a cigarette.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for noise;  
after menstruation.Restless limbs & chorea
SYMPTOMS  Constant jerking and trembling  
of the hands and legs. There may be 
constant movement, a compulsion to hurry, 
and frenetic, excess energy, although 
walking and kneeling may be difficult.  
The twitching and jerking movements are 
random and unpredictable, possibly with 
pins and needles or numbness. Sleep is 
restless, and there may be a headache that 
feels as though needles are pricking the 
brain. There may be great irritability  
and impatience.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for seeing  
bright colors; for music; for smoking  
a cigarette.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for movement;  
for noise; at the same time each year; for 
witnessing the suffering and pain of others.
Angina & heart disorders
SYMPTOMS  Trembling, starts, and thumping  
in the heart, which feels twisted and out of 
position. The pulse is irregular and infrequent, 
and there may be chorea  (see above) .
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for rest;  
for music.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for noise; for 
exertion; for putting hands in cold water.
Women’s health
SYMPTOMS  Sensitive genitalia with severe 
vulval itching. The vagina may feel hot, dry , 
and raw. Symptoms may be associated with 
excessive sexual activity and fibroids.
Symptoms better  For rolling from side to side.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for scratching; 
after heavy menstruation; on the left side.KEY SYMPTOMS sensitivity to music • mood swings • extreme restlessness • rolling 
from side to side • promiscuity and heightened libido • craving for spicy foodsMAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Found in many parts of southern Europe.
BACKGROUND
Not used medicinally outside homeopathy, 
although a related species, the trapdoor 
spider ( Cteniza fodiens ), is used for 
swellings and skin ulcers in traditional 
Chinese medicine.
PREPARATION
The whole, live spider is macerated in 
alcohol and left to dissolve. The resulting 
solution is then succussed and diluted.
COMMON NAMES
Tarentula, wolf spider, Spanish spider, 
hunting spider.
See also Multiple sclerosis,  page 179 ; Diabetes,  page 191Cystitis
SYMPTOMS  Intense burning and stinging on 
urinating, a frequent urge to urinate, and 
incontinence when laughing and coughing. 
Urine smells foul and has a sandy sediment.
Symptoms better  For rolling from side to side; 
for rest.
Symptoms worse  For cold; in the evening; for 
touch; after menstruation.Often confused with the formidable American arachnid, which belongs to  
a different family , this European spider is not deadly . However, its bite was once 
thought to cause tarantism, a disease marked by either mania or melancholy .  
The name “tarentula” is derived from Tarento, a port on the coast of southeast Italy 
that was particularly associated with the spider. The common names “wolf spider” 
and “hunting spider” arose from this species’ habit of chasing its prey rather than 
trapping it in a web. Tarentula  was proved in 1864 by the Spanish homeopath  
Dr. Nunez, and is used for overstimulation of the nervous system.Jaws suck  
food into body 
as liquid
TARENTULA Despite its fearsome reputation, 
probably based on the link with tarantism and  
on confusion with the deadly North American 
tarantula, the bite of this spider is about as  
toxic as a bee sting.

•115
TUBERCULINUMTuberculinum Koch & T. bovum
REMEDY PROFILE
Intensity and yearning are two traits that 
characterize people most suited to 
Tuberculinum.  There is typically a longing  
for constant stimulation and change that may 
manifest itself, for example, in a desire to 
change partners, to change jobs, to travel,  
or to frequently redecorate the home.
These tendencies can have negative 
consequences. For example, a deep, 
romantic longing unfulfilled by a string  
of partners may ultimately lead to 
disillusionment. This and a lack of 
fulfillment may result in maliciousness, 
cruelty, and destructive anger, and may even 
lead to alcohol or drug addiction. Many 
19th-century Romantic composers and 
artists were of this disposition: their works 
display the bittersweetness and underlying 
dissatisfaction typical of this temperament.
Although the remedy is not used for TB 
itself, many people suited to Tuberculinum  
have a family history of TB infection. 
Common symptoms include a susceptibility 
to colds and persistent tiredness. Symptoms 
improve with fresh, dry air, such as 
mountain air. There is a desire for sweets, 
cold milk, and smoked meats, and  
a tendency to perspire heavily during  
the night.
Coughs & acute bronchitis
SYMPTOMS  A dry , hard, possibly recurrent 
cough, with fever and night sweats. Sharp 
pains may be felt in the upper left lung. The 
lymph glands in the neck may be enlarged.  
If symptoms are associated with bronchitis, there is shortness of breath, wheezing, and  
a persistent cough with yellow phlegm. 
Eventually , illness may lead to emaciation.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for cool winds; 
for dry surroundings.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for damp and 
humidity; for stuffy surroundings; for  
physical exertion.
Colds
SYMPTOMS  A recurrent, persistent chest cold, 
with solid, yellow catarrh, a slight fever, and 
aching muscles. The eyes have a tendency to 
water, and the throat is sore.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; in cool,  
dry surroundings.
Symptoms worse  For dry cold; for damp and 
humidity; for stuffy surroundings.
Arthritic pains
SYMPTOMS  Aching joint and limb pains that 
move from one part of the body to another. 
There may also be initial stiffness that loosens 
with movement. The limbs are weary  
and restless.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for cool,  
dry surroundings.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp and 
humidity; for physical exertion.
Hay fever
SYMPTOMS  A runny nose with constant 
sneezing, nasal congestion, and watery 
catarrh. The eyes tend to water.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for cool,  
dry surroundings.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp and 
humidity; for physical exertion.KEY SYMPTOMS constant desire for change • irritable, malicious temperament  
• romantic nature • susceptibility to recurrent respiratory illness • desire for open air
SOURCE DETAILS
ORIGIN
Prepared from human sputum ( Koch) or 
bovine lymph gland tissue ( bovum ) infected 
with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
BACKGROUND
Once a major killer, TB became less common 
thanks to vaccination, but is now rising 
again, partly due to the prevalence of HIV.
PREPARATION
Bacilli from infected tissue or sputum are 
sterilized, dissolved in puriﬁed water, diluted, 
and succussed.
COMMON NAME
Tuberculosis.
See also Asthma,  page 181 ; Tuberculosis,  page 182 ; Osteoarthritis,  page 196 ; Allergies,  page 206MAJOR ANIMAL REMEDIES
Neurotic behavior
SYMPTOMS  Irritable, malicious behavior, with a 
strong sense of discontent. This can cause a 
compulsive urge to change jobs, move house, 
or travel. A sense of lack of fulfillment is often 
combined with an incurably romantic nature. 
There is a tendency to suffer insomnia.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for cool,  
dry surroundings.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp and 
humidity; for physical exertion.TUBERCULOSIS Bacilli are usually inhaled into the 
lungs or ingested into the stomach, from where 
they infect the lymph system.Bacillus is  
rod-shapedOne quarter of all deaths in Europe in the mid-19th century were due to 
tuberculosis (TB). It was a major killer worldwide, particularly in areas 
subject to poverty , malnutrition, or disease, until the German bacteriologist 
Robert Koch identified the bacillus in 1882, and discovered that a preparation 
of tuberculinum (dead tuberculosis bacilli) could be used to treat and prevent 
it. The British homeopath Dr. James Compton Burnett began a series of tests 
on lung tissue from infected patients in 1885, and by 1890 was able to prove 
the homeopathic remedy , which is given mainly for respiratory tract complaints.
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis is bacillus 
that causes tuberculosis



minor 
remedies
the full homeopathic materia medica contains 
over 2,000 remedies made from a wide variety of 
material from the plant, mineral, and animal 
kingdoms, some of which are more commonly 
used than others. this section provides 
profiles of approximately 250 of the most 
important minor remedies.

118 •MINOR REMEDIES
Abies canadensis syn. Tsuga canadensis
ABIES CAN.
COMMON NAMES Hemlock spruce, Canada 
pitch, Canada spruce.
ORIGIN Native to North America and  
eastern Asia.
BACKGROUND As early as 1535, native 
Americans used this plant internally for 
indigestion, and externally (mixed with castor 
oil) for gonorrhea.
PREPARATION The fresh bark and young buds 
are macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Abies can.  is best suited to people who tend to 
be either fretful or quiet and careful. Often 
weak, nervous, and lightheaded, they may lie 
down frequently , especially with their legs 
drawn up, to avoid fainting.
Classic physical characteristics include 
chilliness and clammy skin, a sensation that 
the blood has turned to cold water, or a 
feeling that there is a wet cloth between the 
shoulder blades.
Abies can.  is given primarily to treat digestive 
disorders associated with inflamed mucous 
membranes in the stomach and poor absorption 
of food. Overeating is common in such cases; 
even after eating there are hunger pains and 
rumbling in the bowels. Nausea, bloating, and 
severe burning pain in the abdomen may cause 
palpitations to develop in the heart.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the affected 
area; for passing gas.
Symptoms worse  After standing for long 
periods; for sitting; for drinking tea.
Acanthia lectularia syn. 
Cimex lectularius
CIMEX
COMMON NAME Bed bug.
ORIGIN Found in unsanitary 
environments in temperate regions.
BACKGROUND The ancient Greeks and 
Romans crushed bed bugs with salt and 
human milk to make an eye ointment. When 
powdered they were used for fevers and as a 
preventative remedy for plague.
PREPARATION Live bed bugs are steeped in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Cimex  is most appropriate for those who are 
prey to anxiety , especially after a chill or 
drinking alcohol. They may adopt a 
crouching position, desiring to creep into 
their own body because they are unable to 
curl themselves up sufficiently . A chilly stage may develop prior to fever, during which they 
may be violent, wanting to tear everything to 
pieces or clenching their hands in rage.
Cimex  is typically prescribed for certain types 
of joint or muscle aches accompanied by a 
strong compulsion to stretch and, sometimes, 
chills and fever. Muscles and tendons such as 
hamstrings may feel too short for the limbs.
Symptoms better  For sitting huddled up; for 
passing gas; for avoiding alcohol.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for stretching.
Achillea millefolium
MILLEFOLIUM
COMMON NAMES Yarrow, milfoil, woundwort, 
staunchweed, nosebleed.
ORIGIN Native to Europe and western Asia, 
yarrow grows wild in meadows and waste 
ground in temperate regions.
BACKGROUND The Latin name of this plant derives 
from the warrior Achilles, the Greek hero of the 
Trojan war, who used yarrow to staunch the 
wounds of his soldiers. The plant has also been 
used for centuries in Europe as a bitter tonic.
PREPARATION The fresh, flowering aerial parts 
are chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Millefolium  best suits those who tend to be 
most irritable in the evening. Longing for rest but going to bed late, they wake feeling 
unrefreshed, confused, dizzy , and stupefied, 
as if drunk. When irritable, they may become 
overly excitable and violent. Children who fit 
this profile tend to moan and sigh.
Millefolium  is used chiefly for bleeding 
from injuries, and for internal bleeding  
and menstrual irregularities, such as 
delayed or absent menstruation that may 
lead to convulsions, or heavy menstrual 
periods that impair fertility. Millefolium  may 
also be given in pregnancy for severe 
colicky pain, diarrhea, and painful varicose 
veins, or for recovery from miscarriage. It is 
used for profuse, painless uterine bleeding 
following childbirth or an abortion, and for 
sore nipples and suppressed breast milk 
after childbirth.
The other key symptom for Millefolium  is 
congestion, associated with piercing pains in 
the ears, teeth, and temples. There may be 
congestion in the ears, eyes, nose, and chest.
Symptoms better  For bleeding; if missed 
menstruation is reestablished; for wine.
Symptoms worse  For sleeping or lying down; 
for doubling over; for lifting; for violent exertion; 
for injury; for coffee.
Acidum aceticum
ACETIC AC.
COMMON NAMES Acetic acid, glacial acetic  
acid, ethanoic acid.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Dilute acetic acid is a principal 
component of vinegar, and is used in the  
herbal and culinary traditions of many  
diverse cultures.
PREPARATION Acetic acid is dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People who benefit most from 
Acetic ac.  often sigh due to feelings 
of depression, anxiety , or 
irritability , and are also prone to forgetfulness. 
They are often anemic, with pale, waxy ,  
clammy skin and intense thirst. Despite 
profound sleepiness, they may find it  
difficult to sleep.
Debilitation and emaciation are the key 
factors linked to this remedy. It is often 
prescribed to treat fainting, breathlessness, 
water retention, diabetes, or great 
exhaustion following an injury, an 
operation, or hemorrhaging.
Severe burning pains and tenderness in the 
stomach can also be treated using Acetic ac. ,  
if they are accompanied by symptoms such  
as sour-tasting belches, vomiting, and  ACHILLEA 
MILLEFOLIUM  
(Yarrow)

•119 MINOR REMEDIES
profuse salivation, or by the classic 
debilitation symptoms.
Symptoms better  For lying on the stomach; for 
belching; for potatoes.
Symptoms worse  In the morning; for 
movement; for overexertion; for lying on the 
back; for bread and butter; for vegetables; for 
cold drinks; for wine.
Acidum benzoicum
BENZOIC AC.
COMMON NAME Benzoic acid.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Found naturally in Siam benzoic 
resin, this acid was first produced synthetically 
in the 1860s from coal tar. It is widely used as a 
food preservative.
PREPARATION Benzoic acid is dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Benzoic ac.  is best suited to those who tend to 
alternate between excitable behavior and a state 
of deep, stuporous sleep, general dullness, and 
weariness. A preoccupation with unpleasant 
topics may cause them to dwell on their own 
and other people’s misfortunes. They are often 
extremely sensitive to noise, especially if they 
have Ménière’s disease (a disorder of the inner 
ear). Babies who respond well to Benzoic ac.   
like to be picked up and held, but dislike being 
laid down.
Wandering pains are the key symptoms 
associated with this remedy , such as pains 
that move from the leg joints to the internal 
organs, especially the heart, and then radiate 
to the joints of the extremities. Other 
symptoms may include joints that crack, with 
redness and swelling that may be linked to 
acute gout, and sharp, tearing pains in the 
joints of the big toe.
The remedy is used particularly if symptoms 
include profuse, dark brown, strong-smelling 
urine and incontinence at night, or if there are 
frothy , white stools that smell offensive.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest; for 
passing large quantities of urine.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp weather; 
for drafts; for movement; for scanty flow of 
urine; for chocolate; for sweets; for alcohol; for 
coffee; for wine.
Acidum boricum
BORIC AC.
COMMON NAMES Boric acid, boracic acid, 
orthoboric acid.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Used as a mild antiseptic in conventional medicine, boric acid is more 
commonly utilized in the nuclear industry .
PREPARATION Powdered or crystallized boric 
acid is triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Low spirits, sighing and weeping, and a state 
of mental and physical collapse are all 
indications of the suitability of Boric ac.  All 
parts of the body feel cold, although 
paradoxically the remedy may be used for 
menopausal hot flashes.
T ypical symptoms treated by Boric ac.  
include a heavy, nauseous feeling in the 
stomach, with profuse, cold saliva and a 
dry, furred tongue and throat. It is also 
prescribed for headaches accompanied by 
nausea, for dizziness, and for eyes that are 
prone to swelling and conjunctivitis, and 
aggravated by light.
Boric ac.  is also taken for its antiseptic 
properties. It is used to halt putrefaction in 
wounds, and for skin eruptions that are 
accompanied by flaking, itching, and hard, 
red, swollen patches.
Symptoms better  For walking in open air.
Symptoms worse  None known.
Acidum carbolicum
CARBOLIC AC.
COMMON NAMES Carbolic acid, phenol.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND In 19th-century Europe and the 
US this acid was used to sterilize surgical 
equipment. It is an antiseptic and 
disinfectant, although prolonged contact can 
lead to health problems.
PREPARATION Carbolic acid is dissolved in 
purified water, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
This remedy is most suited to those who  
tend to be restless, irritable, forgetful, and 
bewildered. Often exhausted, they yawn and 
stretch constantly , and have a very acute sense 
of smell. Perplexing dreams leave them 
unrefreshed after sleep.
Carbolic ac.  is used for sudden burning, 
pricking, stinging pains, typically with 
marked collapse, such as the anaphylactic 
shock that may follow a bee sting. It is also 
prescribed for malignant or septic wounds, 
particularly if these are linked to compound 
fractures. Another use of the remedy is for 
treating increased urine production with or 
without burning pain, possibly associated 
with diabetes or other diseases that may 
affect urine production. Urine is typically 
black or green in color, and is accompanied by putrid, strong-smelling discharges, 
notably from the anus.
The remedy may additionally be used to 
treat vomiting due to sea sickness, 
pregnancy, or cancer. The vomiting is 
accompanied by a constant thirst for water, 
a tendency to belch, and abdominal pain. 
Offensive-smelling diarrhea, dysentery, or 
cholera may also be  treated, as may 
constipation with foul breath.
Symptoms better  For rubbing and binding up 
painful areas; for smoking; for strong tea.
Symptoms worse  For pregnancy; for jarring; for 
walking; for mental exertion.
Acidum hydrochloricum syn.  
A. muriaticum
MURIATIC AC.
COMMON NAME Hydrochloric acid.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Discovered by alchemists in the 
13th century, hydrochloric acid is present 
in the stomach’s gastric juices. In excess it 
can cause gastric ulcers to develop, while a 
deficiency leads to poor food absorption 
and anemia.
PREPARATION The acid is dissolved in alcohol, 
diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People for whom Muriatic ac.  is most 
appropriate tend to feel too weak to move. 
Drowsy by day, but restless in bed, they 
have anxious dreams and are prone to 
talking in their sleep. They may be either 
sad and reserved or loquacious. Often 
irritable and fretful, their minds may be 
crowded with thoughts.
This remedy is typically prescribed for 
weakness or physical collapse, such as that 
associated with chronic fatigue syndrome, 
or developing after a feverish illness such as 
mononucleosis or typhoid. The muscles, 
especially those of the heart, tongue, 
bladder, and anus, may be weak, exhausted, 
or partially paralyzed.
Muriatic ac.  is given when the collapsed 
state is associated with dryness, bleeding, 
and ulceration of the mucous membranes of 
the mouth and digestive tract. A heavy 
tongue and dry mouth may make talking 
difficult, and deep-seated ulcers or small 
tumors may develop on the tongue.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for movement; 
for lying on the left side.
Symptoms worse  For wet weather;  
for touch; for bathing in the sea; during 
menstruation; for cold drinks; for sliding 
down in bed.

120 •MINOR REMEDIES
Acidum oxalicum
OXALIC AC.
COMMON NAME Oxalic acid.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Identified as a constituent of 
wood sorrel in the 17th century , this acid was 
first made synthetically in 1776.
PREPARATION Oxalic acid crystals are dissolved 
in alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Oxalic ac.  is used for those whose pains occur 
violently and briefly in localized areas of the 
body , and who generally feel worse for 
dwelling on them. They are nervous, 
confused, dizzy people, who often have 
trouble sleeping.
Usually the remedy is given for angina with 
palpitations that are worse for lying down. 
When those affected think about their heart, 
it seems to make it flutter or beat 
intermittently . In men, other symptoms that 
can be treated by Oxalic ac.  include 
throbbing, crushing pain in the testes, and 
pain in the spermatic cord.
Symptoms better  After passing stools; for 
changing position.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for mental exertion; 
for dwelling on symptoms; for light; in the early 
morning; in the evening or at night; for 
movement; for being touched on the left side; 
for shaving; for grapes, strawberries, or sour 
fruit; for sugar; for coffee; for wine.
Acidum picrinicum
PICRIC AC.
COMMON NAMES Picric acid, trinitrophenol.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This acid derives its name from 
the Greek pikros , meaning “bitter.” It is used 
as a yellow dye and in explosives.
PREPARATION The crystals are dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Picric ac.  is best suited to people who are 
prone to intellectual collapse and nervous 
exhaustion—perhaps students who have 
studied too hard for exams. They have a 
tendency to be indifferent, listless, and lack 
motivation, and the slightest exertion makes 
them want to lie down. Exhaustion and poor 
concentration are other common symptoms.
The classic symptom picture for Picric ac.  is 
of indifference with great mental and physical 
fatigue, which may develop into actual 
paralysis. Muscular pains in the limbs may 
accompany fatigue, and there may be weak, heavy sensations in the limbs and back, and 
burning along the spine, particularly upon 
any exertion. The hands and feet may  
feel cold.
Symptoms better  For bandaging affected 
areas; for rest; for sun and open air; for cold 
air; for bathing in cold water.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for mental 
exertion; for any secretion, such as catarrh, 
semen, blood, or vaginal discharge.
Acidum salicylicum
SALICYLIC AC.
COMMON NAME Salicylic acid.
ORIGIN Obtained originally from the bark of 
the willow tree, but now commercially 
prepared from phenol.
BACKGROUND Salicylic acid is the main 
ingredient of aspirin. It was first used to 
prepare aspirin by the Italian chemist  
R. Piria in 1838.
PREPARATION Salicylic acid crystals are 
triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
This remedy is most appropriate for those 
who are prone to extreme prostration, 
weakness, and fainting, often due to post-viral 
fatigue. They may be mild-natured, restless, 
or anxious, and tend to be either overexcited 
or stupefied and dull. They are sleepy and 
yawn often, but wake frequently from sleep 
thinking that they can hear music.
Key symptoms associated with Salicylic ac.  
are weakness, ulceration, and ear problems 
such as tinnitus, vertigo, and progressive 
deafness, possibly due to Ménière’s disease  
(a disorder of the inner ear). The remedy  
may also be used for severe headaches with 
piercing pains that start at the top or back  
of the head. Any ulceration tends to focus  
on the mucous membranes: mouth ulcers,  
for instance, may be treated with  
Salicylic ac .
Symptoms better  For hot compresses, 
especially dry compresses.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; at night; for the 
slightest cold touch; for movement.
See also Tinnitus,  page 222
Acidum sulphuricum
SULPHURIC AC.
COMMON NAMES Sulfuric acid, oil of vitriol.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This oily , corrosive liquid was 
discovered by alchemists in the 13th century . 
It is used to make dyes, drugs,  
and fertilizers.PREPARATION Sulfuric acid is dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People for whom Sulphuric ac.  is best suited 
are hurried, mentally restless, and excitable, 
despite great exhaustion, weakness, and 
trembling. Usually mentally sharp, they are 
prone to nervous exhaustion, becoming 
absentminded and dull when ill.
The classic symptom picture for this 
remedy is of extreme fatigue following an 
injury , concussion, or operation, especially if 
healing is slow, with bruising, bleeding, 
ulceration, gangrene, or other symptoms of  
decay . There is often a marked sensitivity to 
pollutants such as smoke. The remedy may 
also be prescribed for diabetes.
Symptoms better  For moderate 
temperatures; for lying on the affected side; 
for hot drinks.
Symptoms worse  For open air; for menopause; 
for injuries; for the smell of coffee; for air 
pollution and tobacco smoke.
See also Diabetes,  page 191
Actaea spicata
ACTAEA SPIC.
COMMON NAMES Baneberry , herb Christopher.
ORIGIN Native to Eurasia, although now found 
in many temperate regions of the Northern 
Hemisphere.
BACKGROUND Herbalists use this plant to treat 
rheumatic symptoms, especially those 
occurring in minor joints. Its purplish-black 
berries are used in dyes.
PREPARATION The fresh root, collected after the 
shoots emerge and before bloom, is chopped 
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Actaea spic.  is most suited to sad, 
absentminded people who are easily startled 
and often prey to fear or anxiety . They are 
prone to a fear of death, particularly when in 
bed at night. Their judgment is generally 
poor, and they may feel hopeless, confused, 
impatient, and restless, especially if they 
experience a shock. They may even think that 
they are going insane. They may be egotistical 
and unreliable in relationships.
Actaea spic.  is usually given for this state 
of mind in conjunction with rheumatoid 
arthritis that is accompanied by tearing 
pains, especially if minor joints such as the 
wrists are affected. The pain may be so 
severe that the limbs actually feel paralyzed, 
causing crying out, weariness, and possibly 
eventual lameness.

•121 MINOR REMEDIES
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For changes in the weather 
or temperature; for cold air; at night; for touch; 
for the slightest fatigue; for the slightest 
exertion; for mental exertion.
Adonis vernalis
ADONIS
COMMON NAMES False hellebore, yellow 
pheasant’s eye.
ORIGIN Native to Russia and the Black Sea 
region, and now found in much of Europe, 
growing on mountain pastures.
BACKGROUND The plant takes its name from 
Adonis, a Greek mythological figure linked  
to the seasonal renewal of plant life. In Russia 
it is used as a heart remedy .
PREPARATION The chopped aerial parts of the 
plant are steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Adonis  is suitable tend to  
be apprehensive and prone to horrible dreams 
and restless sleep. They generally feel 
“waterlogged” and uncomfortable.
The classic symptom picture for Adonis   
is of heart degeneration, perhaps following  
a bout of severe influenza or rheumatic 
fever. There may be pain and palpitations  
in the area around the heart. The heart 
rhythms may be abnormally rapid or slow 
and faltering, possibly because of diseased 
valves or fatty degeneration. Edema  
(an irregular accumulation of fluid in the 
body tissues or cavities), which develops  
as a result of poor circulation and is 
accompanied by scanty urine, may be 
treated by Adonis.
The remedy is also used to treat asthma 
with breathlessness, discomfort, or heart 
disease. Further symptoms may include 
headaches that move from the back of the 
head, around the temples, to the eyes.
Symptoms better  For exertion.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for lying down.
Aesculus hippocastanum
AESCULUS
COMMON NAMES Horse chestnut, conker.
ORIGIN Native to southeastern Europe, and 
grown in temperate areas worldwide.
BACKGROUND The common name is thought  
to originate from the traditional T urkish 
custom of feeding the nuts to horses as an 
antidote to flatulence.
PREPARATION The fresh, ripe, peeled, and  
finely chopped horse chestnuts are macerated 
in alcohol.Remedy 
profile
This remedy is best 
suited to people who 
are very low, 
depressed, and 
irritable, with poor 
concentration. They 
may lose their temper 
easily , tending to brood afterward.
The remedy is given primarily for treating 
hemorrhoids, especially when the rectum 
feels dry and uncomfortable, as though it is 
full of small sticks, or when the hemorrhoids 
are internal and associated with constipation 
and pain in the lower back. Often the anus 
feels hot, dry , and itchy . Lumpy stools may 
occur, with stabbing, tearing, or splinterlike 
pains in the anus. Distension in the bowels 
may develop, with colicky pain and foul-
smelling gas. There may be varicose veins, 
and a feeling of congestion and tenderness in 
the liver. The hemorrhoids may be associated 
with pains and chills in the spine, and a dull, 
constant backache that makes bending down 
or rising after sitting difficult, and walking 
almost impossible.
In addition, the remedy is given for a dry , 
rough, burning throat accompanied by 
sneezing and profuse catarrh.
Symptoms better  For cool air (unless it is 
directly inhaled); for vigorous exercise.
Symptoms worse  For bending or getting up 
from a seat; for walking; for standing; for 
breathing deeply; for swallowing; for passing 
stools; after eating; for sleep.
See also Hemorrhoids,  page 238
Aethusa cynapium
AETHUSA
COMMON NAME Fool’s parsley .
ORIGIN Found throughout Europe.
BACKGROUND The poison from this plant 
is thought to produce marked dullness 
and stupor, hence its common name 
of fool’s parsley .
PREPARATION The whole flowering 
plant, with the root and unripe fruits,  
is chopped and macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Aethusa  are  
often characterized by poor concentration  
and a tendency to be easily distracted. They 
are generally reserved, alienated, reclusive, 
and irritable.
Key symptoms associated with Aethusa  
include a confused state of mind with scattered thoughts; those affected may talk  
to themselves and behave foolishly . Other 
typical symptoms can include marked 
dullness and a sluggish mental state, possibly 
linked with an inability to study . These 
symptoms may be accompanied by 
prostration with a sense of staleness, or 
anxiety with associated nervous diarrhea.
Aethusa  is also appropriate for children 
with milk intolerance, notably babies who 
are prone to sudden vomiting after feeding, 
and who may have diarrhea. Lack of 
nutrition may set up a cycle of hunger, 
frequent feeding, and subsequent violent 
vomiting. This may result in a state of 
extreme exhaustion and collapse, causing 
the baby’s face to appear drawn, agonized, 
and aged. It may also seem as though the 
baby’s whole body has enlarged, particularly 
in the heart area.
Symptoms better  For open air; for walking; for 
company and conversation; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For warmth and hot weather; 
between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m.; for overexertion; 
for eating frequently; for milk.
 
AETHUSA 
CYNAPIUM  
(Fool’s parsley)AESCULUS  
HIPPOCASTANUM   
(Horse chestnut)

122 •MINOR REMEDIES
Agkistrodon contortrix  
syn. Cenchris contortrix
CENCHRIS
COMMON NAME Copperhead snake.
ORIGIN Found in the central and eastern  
US in forests, rocky terrain, and arid areas.
BACKGROUND This snake belongs to the 
venomous pit viper family , which is 
responsible for the majority of 
snakebite incidents in the 
central and eastern US.
PREPARATION  
The fresh venom is 
triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Cenchris  is particularly suitable for people who 
experience great mental restlessness, jealousy , 
suspicion, and abandonment. They have a 
general tendency to be rather absentminded, 
moody , and dreamy , often experiencing vivid, 
horrible dreams that continue in their thoughts 
once they are awake. Their anxieties may 
include a fear of rape, pins and pointed objects, 
going to sleep, and sudden death.
The classic symptom picture for Cenchris  is of 
breathlessness, mental and physical restlessness, 
and a desire to drink small quantities of water. 
Another classic symptom is a need to loosen the 
clothing, triggered by congestion in the blood 
vessels. Complaints are usually right-sided. 
There may be a susceptibility to allergies, 
especially in the spring.
Symptoms better  In the morning.
Symptoms worse  In the afternoon, in the 
evening, and all night; for lying down; for 
waking; for pressure on the affected area.ORIGIN Native to China and India, but can 
now also be found growing in North America, 
Europe, and Australia.
BACKGROUND In Australia and Asia, the tree’s 
bark was used for profuse vaginal discharge, 
gonorrhea, worms, malaria, and asthma. 
Chinese herbalists use it to treat diarrhea 
and dysentery .
PREPARATION The fresh, budding flowers 
are macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Ailanthus  is best suited to those who feel 
extremely weak when ill, and frequently 
behave in a stupid, dull, and confused 
way . They may feel anxious, odd, or even 
crazy . Key symptoms indicating that this 
remedy is suitable are fevers with great 
weakness and congestion of the blood, which 
typically gives the skin a purple, mottled, 
swollen appearance. Ailanthus  is often given for 
acute bouts of mononucleosis with swollen 
tonsils and neck glands. Pain extends from the 
neck glands to the ears on swallowing. The 
tonsils on the left side are mainly affected, and 
may develop oozing mucus or ulcers.
Symptoms better  For lying on the right side;  
for hot drinks.
Symptoms worse  For skin eruptions that fail to 
develop; for the slightest movement; for sitting 
up; for the sight of food.
See also Mononucleosis,  page 254
Allium sativum
ALLIUM SAT.
COMMON NAME Garlic.
ORIGIN Native to central Asia, and now  
grown worldwide.
BACKGROUND Garlic is one of the most ancient 
of herbs, used by the Babylonians as early as 
c. 3000 BCE. It is now a popular culinary herb 
and an important medicinal plant, valued for 
its antibiotic properties.
PREPARATION The fresh garlic bulbs are minced 
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Allium sat.  is most appropriate for people  
who are oversensitive and need company . 
Although subject to many fears, they have  
a particular fear of being poisoned. They 
generally enjoy a rich, gourmet diet, 
especially one that includes meat, but are 
prone to indigestion and catarrh problems.
The remedy is primarily associated with 
indigestion caused by a rich diet or by dietary 
change. The digestive process is accompanied 
by pressure in the upper abdomen, foul-
smelling gas, and colicky pains around the Agraphis nutans
AGRAPHIS
COMMON NAMES Bluebell, wild hyacinth.
ORIGIN Found in established woodland areas 
throughout Europe.
BACKGROUND According to legend, this flower 
was created by the Greek god Apollo in 
beloved memory of the youth Hyacinthus, 
whom he accidentally killed.
PREPARATION The 
fresh plant, young 
shoots, and roots 
are macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Agraphis  is best suited are low 
in vitality and prone to catching colds. The 
classic symptom picture is of ear, nose, and 
throat infections linked to catarrh and deafness, 
particularly during childhood. There may be 
catarrh in the bridge of the nose, obstructing the 
nostrils, and discharges from all the mucous 
membranes. Chills develop easily after exposure 
to cold winds, accompanied by diarrhea with 
mucus. During infection the tonsils and 
adenoids may be swollen.
Symptoms better  For shelter; for lying  
on the stomach.
Symptoms worse  For heat and humidity.
Ailanthus altissima
AILANTHUS
COMMON NAMES Tree of heaven, shade tree, 
Chinese sumac, copal tree.AGKISTRODON  
CONTORTRIX   
(Copperhead snake)

•123 MINOR REMEDIES
navel. Dull pains in the bowels and either 
constipation or diarrhea may be present. 
Allium sat.  is also used to treat tearing pains  
in the hip area and abdomen.
Symptoms better  For sitting bent over.
Symptoms worse  In the evening; at night; for 
walking; for pressure on the affected area.
Aluminum potassium sulphuricum
ALUMEN
COMMON NAMES Potash alum, double sulfate of 
aluminum and potassium.
ORIGIN Chemically produced from sulfates  
of aluminum and potassium.
BACKGROUND Potash alum is used in the 
making of chamois leather, and as a dye in 
the paint industry . It is used medicinally for 
minor bleeding cuts and mouth ulcers.
PREPARATION Pure crystals of potash alum are 
triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
People for whom Alumen  is best suited are 
extremely anxious and sad. They are usually 
very nervous, experiencing tremors on hearing 
bad news, or palpitations on thinking about any 
illness that may affect them. They have a fear of 
falling, and may mistrust others. Sleep is light or 
elusive, and they tend to stay in bed more than 
necessary . Illness tends to develop during sleep. 
Alumen  is often given to the elderly .
The typical symptom picture for Alumen  is 
of bowel problems and paralytic, sluggish 
weakness of the muscles. Disturbances of the 
bowel include dysentery and bloody diarrhea, 
painful ulceration in the rectum, bleeding 
hemorrhoids, and a deep anal ache. There 
may be severe constipation, possibly due to 
uterine or rectal cancer.
Symptoms better  For open air.
Symptoms worse  For cold; during sleep; for 
lying on the right side; for bad news.
Ambrosia artemisiaefolia
AMBROSIA
COMMON NAMES Ragweed, Roman  
wormwood, hogweed.
ORIGIN Found in Europe, Mexico, Brazil, and 
North America.
BACKGROUND This plant’s green, tassel-like 
flowers produce large amounts of pollen that 
can trigger severe hay fever.
PREPARATION A tincture is made from the fresh 
flower heads and young shoots.
Remedy profile
Ambrosia  is generally given for hay fever. The 
whole of the respiratory system may be affected. The nose and head feel congested, and there  
is sneezing, watery catarrh, and possible 
nosebleeds. The eyes water, smart, burn, and 
itch. There may be a wheezy cough, asthmatic 
irritation, or whooping cough. These symptoms 
may also be associated with diarrhea, notably in 
the summer months.
Symptoms better  For being indoors.
Symptoms worse  For being outside.
Ammonium bromatum
AMMONIUM BROM.
COMMON NAME Ammonium bromide.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This compound exists as 
colorless prismatic crystals with a salty taste. 
It is not used commercially .
PREPARATION The crystals are dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Ammonium brom.  
tend to be timid and lack self-confidence. 
They fear failure and criticism, and are often 
resentful of other people. They have a 
tendency to bite their nails.
Key symptoms linked with this remedy 
include neuralgic headaches, sore eyes, ovarian 
problems, and epilepsy . Symptoms may appear 
concurrently or individually . The constrictive 
head pains are like a band above the ears. 
During the aura (the warning sensation) 
preceding an epileptic fit, there may be feelings 
of suffocation and faintness, along with sighing 
and a need to walk around the room.
Eye symptoms typically include sore, irritated 
eyes that feel as if they contain sand. There may 
be mucus bathing the eyes, swollen eyelids, and 
possibly a pterygium (a wing-shaped thickening 
of the conjunctiva). In the evening the eyes feel 
large, with constantly blurred vision.
In women, symptoms may be associated with 
the ovaries. They may include nagging, 
neuralgic pains, bleeding of the uterus,  
and hard swelling, especially of the  
left ovary , possibly in conjunction  
with eye irritation. Ammonium 
brom.  may also be prescribed 
for a tormenting, tickly , 
spasmodic cough, such as 
whooping cough, or it may  
be given for a strangling 
cough with mucus that tends 
to occur in the morning. 
Coughing may be incessant  
at night.
Symptoms better  For warmth;  
for warm drinks.
Symptoms worse  For open air or cold air.Ammonium chloratum
AMMONIUM MUR.
COMMON NAMES Sal ammoniac,  
ammonium chloride.
ORIGIN Until the 19th century , the only source 
of this mineral was in central Asia, but now it 
is also chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Sal ammoniac is used industrially 
as an electrolyte in dry cells. Medicinally , it is 
found in many over-the-counter cold and 
cough medicines.
PREPARATION The compound is dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
This remedy is typically given to people who 
are grieving, sad, depressed, and tearful, yet 
are unable to weep. Usually reserved and  
self-pitying, they may resent feeling alone  
in the world.
Ammonium mur .  is generally used for  
these symptoms in conjunction with liver 
complaints, particularly if they are 
accompanied by pinching, shooting pains  
in the stomach, catarrh, and a violent cough 
that is dry and scraping or loose, and profuse. 
Inflammatory eye conditions, menstrual 
disorders, enlarged glands, joint pains, and 
sciatica are other possible symptoms that may 
appear, and for which the remedy may be 
prescribed. Further respiratory symptoms 
typically associated with Ammonium mur .  
include a congested nose, sneezing, a reduced 
sense of smell, a sore throat, hoarseness, and 
thick, slimy mucus in the nose and throat.
Symptoms better  For open air; for rapid 
movement; for walking bent over.
Symptoms worse  For walking erect; for chronic 
sprains; in the morning (in the case of head 
and chest symptoms); in the afternoon (in the 
case of abdominal pains); in the evening (in 
the case of joint pains).
See also Sciatica,  page 218
AMMONIUM CHLORATUM  
(Sal ammoniac)

124 •MINOR REMEDIES
Amylium nitrosum
AMYL NIT.
COMMON NAME Amyl nitrite.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND A powerful drug that dilates the 
blood vessels, amyl nitrate is often used in 
illegal recreational drugs such as “poppers.”
PREPARATION Amyl nitrite is dissolved in 
purified water, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Amyl nit.  is most appropriate for people who 
are hot and red, feel constricted by their 
clothes, and have a desire for fresh air. They 
may be weak, anxious, restless, and weary , 
often due to disturbed sleep.
The classic symptom picture is of flushing 
that spreads rapidly over the skin, followed 
by drenching sweats and great exhaustion. 
The remedy may be used for these symptoms 
in conjunction with menopause, sunstroke,  
or heart problems.
T ypical heart symptoms treated with Amyl 
nit. include sharp pains in the heart area and 
a feeling of oppression, with pain radiating 
down the right arm.
Symptoms better  For open air; for exercising 
outside; for rest; for drinking cold water.
Symptoms worse  For the slightest emotion;  
for physical or mental exertion; during  
the menopause.
Anacardium occidentale
ANACARDIUM OCC.
COMMON NAME Cashew nut.
ORIGIN Native to the West Indies.
BACKGROUND The juice inside the shell is a 
skin irritant that causes blistering. In 19th-
century Europe it was used  
to burn off warts and corns.
PREPARATION The black 
juice between the outer 
and inner shell is 
dissolved in alcohol, then 
diluted and succussed.
Remedy profile
Anacardium occ.  is most 
appropriate for people who are prone to poor 
memory and willpower, and who feel 
mentally and physically apathetic and numb. 
They are prone to exam nerves and phobias.
The remedy is given for the above state of 
mind in conjunction with skin and muscle 
complaints. Skin eruptions initially itch and 
burn, then become swollen and sore, before 
producing blisters that may become infected. 
The ears and face may itch and burn. Anacardium occ.  may also be prescribed for 
warts or leprosy .
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  On beginning to move.
See also Phobias,  page 211 ; Exam nerves,  
page 254
Anamirta cocculus syn. Cocculus indicus
COCCULUS
COMMON NAME Indian cockle.
ORIGIN Found in India and southeast Asia.
BACKGROUND Fishermen in southern India use 
this plant as a poison to stun fish and catch 
them easily . It was once added to beer to 
make it more intoxicating.
PREPARATION The powdered seeds are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Cocculus  is most effective for those whose 
concern for others makes them feel at the end 
of their tether. They may become severely 
exhausted, possibly leading to fainting, 
insomnia, and stupor. This state is common 
in those who have spent long periods of time 
nursing a sick relative.
This remedy has a strong affinity with 
central nervous system disorders, especially 
vertigo, dizziness, nausea, sea- and travel- 
sickness, vomiting, and hypersensitivity to 
touch. Nervous oversensitivity may lead 
initially to agitation and dizziness, and 
possibly develop into more serious conditions 
such as muscle weakness, spasms in the legs, 
and gradual paralysis.
Symptoms better  For sitting in a warm room; 
for lying quietly.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for lack of sleep;  
for movement; for movement in vehicles; for 
anxiety; for emotional stress.
Anhalonium lewinii  
syn. Lophophora williamsii
ANHALONIUM
COMMON NAMES Mescal buttons, peyote,  
sacred mushroom.
ORIGIN Native to the southwestern US  
and Mexico.
BACKGROUND For over 3,000 years this cactus 
has been used throughout America as a 
hallucinogenic means of deepening spiritual 
experiences in religious rites.
PREPARATION Boiling water is poured at two 
intervals on the fresh, chopped root.
Remedy profile
This remedy is best suited to people who have 
lost all conception of time and feel separated from ordinary life. They may be introverted, 
lethargic, depressed, and resentful and 
distrustful of others, and can experience 
irrational changes in mood. A general loss of 
identity and willpower may affect them, along 
with an impression that life is meaningless. 
They may have the strange feeling that their 
whole being has become transparent, enabling 
them to see their internal organs.
The symptom picture for Anhalonium  is of 
mental exhaustion, hallucinations with brilliant-
colored vision, migraines, and lack of 
coordination. Headaches or migraines may 
occur in the front of the head, or there may be a 
persistent aching, tired sensation at the back of 
the head. There may be blurred vision, dilated 
pupils, or grotesque, multicolored, distracting 
vision disturbances. Listening to music may 
trigger the feeling that each note is surrounded 
by a halo of color that pulses to the music.
Severe lack of coordination is also associated 
with Anhalonium ; it may be accompanied by 
muscle tremors, nausea, and faintness, and 
neuralgic pains and paralysis in the face. The 
brain is often overactive and prevents sleep.
Symptoms better  For lying down.
Symptoms worse  For closing the eyes;  
for movement.
Apocynum cannabinum
APOCYNUM
COMMON NAMES Indian hemp, American hemp, 
hemp dogbane.
ORIGIN Found in North America.
BACKGROUND This plant has long been known 
by native Americans as a treatment for 
chronic heart disease. Its fibers are also made 
into rope, twine, mats, and baskets.
PREPARATION The fresh underground parts are 
chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Apocynum  is most suitable for people who feel 
confused, low-spirited, and distressed. The 
remedy is prescribed primarily as a treatment 
for edema (a collection of watery fluid in the 
body cavities or under the skin). The edema 
is characteristically associated with diseased 
organs, and may be linked with Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma or Bright’s disease. There is  
often great weakness, irritation in the 
digestive system, a slow or irregular pulse, 
and considerable thirst. Secretions such as 
perspiration and urine may be reduced, and 
breathing patterns may become uneasy .
Symptoms better  For warmth; for sitting up; 
after passing stools.
Symptoms worse  For cold of any kind; for 
uncovering the body; after sleep.ANACARDIUM 
OCCIDENTALE   
(Cashew nuts)

•125 MINOR REMEDIES
 Aqua sanicula
SANICULA
COMMON NAME Sanicula water.
ORIGIN Found near Ottawa, Illinois.
BACKGROUND The Sanicula Springs that 
provide this particular mineral water are 
located near Ottawa, Illinois.
PREPARATION The spring water is mixed  
with alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Irritation is common in those for whom 
Sanicula  is most suited. In children, behavior 
alternates between 
playfulness and bad 
temper, during which  
they will throw themselves 
backward. Intolerance of the 
slightest jarring movement, 
particularly downward motion,  
such as that of an escalator,  
is another typical feature of  
this remedy .
The classic symptom 
picture is of low vitality 
due to undernourishment  
and slow digestion. The physique  
is usually slim and the skin  
condition is poor, possibly with 
eczema. Symptoms tend to change frequently . 
There is often perspiration where body parts 
touch. In women there may be menstrual 
disorders and an uncomfortable feeling that 
the pelvic contents are going to drop out. 
Vaginal discharges smell “fishy .”
Digestive symptoms associated with 
Sanicula  include large, heavy , painful  
stools. The body tends to remain thin 
despite great appetite, and eating causes 
bloating, sour belches, and an urge to  
pass stools. There may be halitosis and  
a bad taste in the mouth.
Symptoms better  For vomiting; for open air;  
for rest; for lying down.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for jarring;  
for strain; for eating and drinking.
Araneus diadematus
ARANEA DIADEMA
COMMON NAMES Papal cross spider, European 
garden spider, diadem spider.
ORIGIN Found in Europe and the US.
BACKGROUND The name of this spider derives 
from the yellow-and-white crosses on its 
back. After mating the female usually binds, 
kills, and eats the male.
PREPARATION The whole, live spider is crushed 
and macerated in alcohol.Remedy profile
People who respond best to  
this remedy tend to be irritable,  
uneasy , nervous, and restless. Feelings  
of claustrophobia or confusion may also  
be present.
Aranea diadema  is most appropriate for 
problems that affect the nervous system and 
are accompanied by coldness and a 
susceptibility to damp. A sensation of great 
chilliness may occur, as if the bones 
themselves are frozen, and there may be a 
fever. All parts of the body may feel heavy, 
numb, and enlarged (especially on waking); 
for example, the hands may feel as if they 
are twice their normal size, and there may 
be pains that feel like electric shocks. 
Symptoms tend to occur or recur 
periodically, or at the same time each day, 
and are usually on the right side.
Symptoms better  For smoking; for open air;  
for pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for rain; 
for getting wet; at exactly the same time 
each day.
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
UVA URSI
COMMON NAMES Uva-ursi, bearberry .
ORIGIN Found in Europe, the US, Mexico, and 
northern Asia.
BACKGROUND Bears like to eat the fruits of 
this plant, hence the name uva-ursi, which 
is derived from the Latin for “bear’s grape.”
PREPARATION The fresh leaves and young 
shoots are chopped and steeped in alcohol.Remedy profile
Uva ursi  is generally used 
for inflammation and 
stones in the kidneys. 
There may be chronic 
bladder irritation with 
blood in the urine, or 
pain with straining to 
pass urine, possibly 
accompanied by a  
weak, irregular pulse, 
breathlessness, 
vomiting, nausea, 
and cyanosis 
(bluish mucous 
membranes and skin 
caused by too much 
deoxygenated hemoglobin 
in the blood). Sharp pains 
may pass from hip to hip. 
In men, the prostate gland 
may become enlarged. Further symptoms that 
may accompany urinary conditions include 
flushing of the face, catarrh, a tight sensation 
in the chest, slight dizziness, and a headache. 
Uva ursi  may also be given for certain 
digestive, respiratory , or childbirth symptoms, 
but the primary focus of the remedy is on 
urinary problems.
Symptoms better  After urination; for lying back.
Symptoms worse  During urination;  
in the evening.
Argentum metallicum
ARGENTUM MET.
COMMON NAME Silver.
ORIGIN Deposits are widely distributed 
throughout the world, but are often small.
BACKGROUND This precious metal has been 
found in ornaments and decorations dating 
from 4000 BCE, and has long been used to 
make coins and jewelry .
PREPARATION Ground silver is triturated with 
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Anxious, restless, hurried, impulsive people 
who often act on a whim respond best to 
Argentum met.  When ill, having to 
concentrate usually makes these people feel 
worse, and their thoughts are chaotic, so 
that they constantly flit from subject to 
subject when talking. Often changeable and 
deceitful, although normally cheerful and 
lively, they may be excessively depressed by 
small upsets.
Argentum met.  is generally used for joint 
and bone disorders associated with the 
connective tissues, especially the cartilage. ARCTOSTAPHYLOS UVA-URSI  
(Uva-ursi)

126 •
There may be bruising pains that bore into 
the joints, or pulling, cramping pains in the 
limbs and bones. Arthritis with paralytic pain 
and weakness may be present. The remedy 
may also be prescribed to treat nervous 
complaints involving spasmodic movements 
and convulsive shocks in the body .
Disorders of the reproductive organs may 
also be treated by Argentum met. , especially if 
they are accompanied by thick, profuse 
secretions of the related mucous membranes. 
In men, frequent seminal emissions without 
sexual excitement at night may be treated. In 
women the remedy is given for ovarian pain, 
possibly due to cysts or tumors, and for 
bleeding between menstrual periods or heavy 
hemorrhaging during menopause. Argentum 
met. may also be helpful in treating throat 
inflammation and voice loss.
Symptoms better  For wrapping up; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for sun; for 
mental strain; for using the voice; for touch;  
in the morning.
Arisaema triphyllum syn. A. atrorubens, 
Arum triphyllum
ARUM TRIPH.
COMMON NAMES Jack-in-the-pulpit, Indian 
turnip, wild turnip.
ORIGIN Found in North America.
BACKGROUND Jack-in-the-pulpit was used 
medicinally by native Americans. The fresh 
root is a severe skin irritant, but when dried  
it was used for a variety of ailments,  including headaches, chest problems, and 
rheumatoid arthritis.
PREPARATION The fresh tuber is chopped and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Arum triph.  tend 
to be excitable and nervous. They are often 
restless and cross. Characteristically , they 
may bore their heads into their pillows. 
Key conditions associated with 
Arum triph.  involve irritation and 
inflammation of the mucous 
membranes and skin, such as 
allergic skin reactions, eczema, 
scarlet fever, or hay fever. T ypical 
symptoms include raw , red, itchy 
skin, particularly on the face, and  
a raw , burning mouth and throat,  
with acute or chronic hoarseness.  
The lips may be chapped or cracked at 
the corners. Picking the lips and the nose are 
further common symptoms, especially if 
accompanied by delirium.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for eating 
breakfast and dinner.
Symptoms worse  For cold and wet; for heat; 
for cold, northeasterly winds; for overusing the 
voice; for lying down.
See also Allergies,  page 206
Arsenicum iodatum
ARSEN. IOD.
COMMON NAMES Arsenic iodide, iodide  
of arsenic.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND These orange-red crystals are 
highly toxic and must be protected from light 
to prevent the loss of iodine.
PREPARATION Pure arsenic iodide crystals are 
dissolved in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy is most appropriate for people 
who are irritable and restless. Excitable and 
impatient, they may have sudden, violent 
impulses. Their bodies are warm.
The classic symptom picture for Arsen. iod.  
is of either great restlessness or total 
exhaustion, possibly associated with chronic 
chest infection and burning discharges from 
the mucous membranes. There may be a 
history of allergic and respiratory conditions.
Arsen. iod.  is most often used for hay fever or 
influenza that is accompanied by the classic 
burning discharge, soreness of the mucous 
membranes, and frequent sneezing. There may 
be a loose, short, hacking cough or a burning, 
sore throat associated with inflammation. The remedy may also be given for asthma and 
shortness of breath with rapid breathing that 
gradually becomes a wheeze. It may also be 
used for hyperactivity in children.
Symptoms better  For open air; after eating.
Symptoms worse  For dry, windy, cold, or foggy 
weather; for the heat of the bed; for exertion; 
for tobacco smoke.
See also Hay fever & allergic rhinitis,  page 224
Artemisia abrotanum
ABROTANUM
COMMON NAMES Southernwood, lady’s love,  
old man.
ORIGIN Native to southern Europe.
BACKGROUND Containing a strong, volatile oil 
that repels insects, this plant’s leaves have 
long been used as a moth repellent when 
placed among clothes.
PREPARATION The fresh, finely chopped leaves 
and shoots are steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Abrotanum  is best suited 
tend to be anxious and depressed. They may 
feel dull of mind and become easily fatigued 
when speaking or studying. Alternatively , they 
can be irritable, excited, and violent, and have 
an urge to shout.
Key symptoms include emaciation and 
debilitation of the lower limbs, possibly in 
children who fail to thrive, or due to polio.  
A classic feature of Abrotanum  is that certain 
symptoms die away rapidly and are 
immediately replaced by other symptoms. For 
example, chest symptoms may develop after 
skin eruptions have failed to come out, heart 
disease develops following the suppression of 
rheumatic symptoms, or mumps is transferred 
from the parotid glands to the testes.
Symptoms better  For passing loose stools;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp air; if 
secretions are suppressed (for instance, by 
taking drugs to suppress diarrhea).
Artemisia absinthium
ABSINTHIUM
COMMON NAMES Common wormwood,  
green ginger.
ORIGIN Native to Europe, but now grows wild 
in central Asia and the eastern US, and is 
widely cultivated in temperate areas.
BACKGROUND Common wormwood was 
originally a primary flavoring in vermouth, 
and the basis of absinthe, an addictive drink 
popular in 19th-century France but now 
illegal in many countries.ARGENTUM METALLICUM  
(Silver)MINOR REMEDIES

•127
PREPARATION The fresh flowers, young leaves, 
and shoots are steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those who respond best to Absinthium  are prone 
to nervous overexcitement, experiencing 
terrifying, horrible dreams and dreadful 
hallucinations. A kind of brutal stupor or 
stupidity may even be apparent in them.
Absinthium  is primarily associated with the 
nerves, and key symptoms include trembling, 
grimacing, and unsteadiness, possibly linked  
to alcoholism. In children the remedy may  
be given for terrible dreams, nervousness, 
insomnia, vertigo, fits or seizures, and epilepsy .
Symptoms better  For movement.
Symptoms worse  For rising from bed or from  
a seat; for staying still.
Artemisia vulgaris
ARTEMISIA
COMMON NAMES Mugwort, wormwood,  
sailor’s tobacco.
ORIGIN Found in temperate regions of the 
Northern Hemisphere.
BACKGROUND Mugwort was traditionally kept in 
medieval homes to ward off the devil. Chinese 
doctors use the herb in moxibustion, a 
traditional treatment.
PREPARATION The fresh root is dug up at  
the beginning of winter, chopped, and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
The classic symptom picture for Artemisia  is  
of nervous disorders, possibly triggered by  
bad news, grief, or a blow to the head.
The nervous conditions for which this 
remedy is used include sleepwalking, fits  
or seizures, chorea (involuntary rapid,  
jerky body movements), and epilepsy .  
There may be absentmindedness and  
stupor. Seizures may be brought on by  
cooling after exertion, or by flickering lights. 
Children who benefit from Artemisia  may  
tend to experience petit mal fits or  
absences rather than full seizures,  
possibly during teething. They may  have been born to mothers who felt great grief 
during their pregnancy .
Symptoms better  At night; for rubbing the eyes; 
for deep breathing.
Symptoms worse  For fright; for grief; for  
head injury; for menstrual problems; for 
prolonged dancing.
Arum maculatum
ARUM MAC.
COMMON NAMES Cuckoo-pint, lords and ladies.
ORIGIN Native to central and western Europe, 
growing in woods and hedgerows.
BACKGROUND The arrow-shaped leaves and  
bright red flowers of this plant are poisonous. 
Insects are trapped by the flowers and  
digested by the plant.
PREPARATION The fresh, finely chopped tuber is 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Arum mac.  is associated with severe, violent 
inflammation or irritation of the mucous 
membranes, and is frequently used for 
respiratory tract problems. T ypical respiratory 
symptoms treated by the remedy include 
asthma, catarrh, nasal polyps, and constant 
swallowing. The gums may bleed, and the 
tongue and throat may be swollen and sore,  
so that swallowing becomes difficult. There  
may be tickling in the throat, hoarseness, and  
a desire to cough. The chest may feel tight,  
and there may be a violent cough and profuse, 
possibly blood-streaked catarrh.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For pressure on the affected 
area; for stretching; on the left side of the body.
Arundo mauritanica
ARUNDO
COMMON NAMES Reed, cannizzola.
ORIGIN Found in southern Europe, Africa,  
and Asia.
BACKGROUND This genus is used in reeds for 
wind instruments, in wickerwork, and to make 
windbreaks to control erosion.
PREPARATION The root sprouts are macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
The mental state for which Arundo  is most 
appropriate is one in which laughter comes 
easily , as do lascivious thoughts. Allergic 
problems are the key symptoms treated by  
this remedy . T ypical problems include hay  
fever with sneezing, catarrhal inflammation,  
and extreme itching inside the nose, 
accompanied by excessive salivation.  There may be a reduced sense of smell, and 
itching and burning in the back palate of the 
mouth. Pain at the back of the head may extend 
to the right eye, with deep-seated pain on either 
side of the head. The hay fever symptoms may 
extend to the eyes, causing prickling, itching, 
and burning of the conjunctiva. The remedy 
may be used to treat blepharitis (inflammation 
of the eyelids).
Arundo  may also be prescribed for a wet 
cough with breathlessness. Bluish-tinged  
mucus may be coughed up, with a sensation  
of bruising in the throat and burning pain  
in the stomach.
Symptoms better  For open air.
Symptoms worse  For movement.
See also Allergies,  page 206
Asarum europaeum
ASARUM
COMMON NAMES Hazelwort, European snakeroot, 
wild nard, public house plant.
ORIGIN Native to woods and shady sites in 
northern and eastern Europe.
BACKGROUND Introduced medicinally by the 
ancient Greek physician Dioscorides, this  
plant was used chiefly as an emetic. Also  
a stimulant, it was once an ingredient of 
tobacconists’ “head-clearin’ snuff.”
PREPARATION The fresh, finely chopped 
underground parts are steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Asarum  are 
nervous, excitable, and oversensitive. They  
are usually weak, often feel chilly , and are 
unable to live robust, ordinary lives. Often  
they are overly ambitious and exhausted due  
to a stressful occupation. Asarum  is also given  
to recovering alcoholics.
The classic symptom picture for this  
remedy is of nervous hypersensitivity and  
edgy , hysterical behavior; even the sound  
of scratching on cloth becomes unbearable. 
Other symptoms commonly include nervous 
exhaustion, restlessness, hand-wringing,  
severe insomnia, and a sensation of floating  
and dizziness. Noise may trigger pain in the  
ears and teeth.
Digestive problems with an aversion to  
eating, possibly associated with anorexia, may 
accompany this disturbed state. There is often 
alcoholism or a desire for alcohol, and an 
aversion to sexual intercourse.
Symptoms better  For damp weather;  
for bathing in cold water.
Symptoms worse  For cold, dry weather;  
for any noise or even the thought of noise;  
for penetrating sounds.ARTEMISIA 
ABSINTHIUM  
(Common 
wormwood)MINOR REMEDIES

128 •MINOR REMEDIES
if the rash is accompanied by cramps and pain, 
or inflammation in the liver area that feels worse 
for pressure on it. There may be stinging pains 
in the temples, ears, and kidneys, and the 
glands may be enlarged and inflamed, especially 
in children and the elderly .
Symptoms better  For walking; for sitting;  
after crying.
Symptoms worse  For uncovering the affected 
area or exposing it to the air; for eating fish  
or meat.
Asterias rubens
ASTERIAS
COMMON NAME Red starfish.
ORIGIN Found around the coastline of  
western Europe.
BACKGROUND Dating back to the earliest 
geological age, the Precambrian era, this 
species has amazing regenerative powers: if 
one of its five arms is lost, for instance, a new 
one is grown in its place.
PREPARATION The whole, live animal is 
chopped up and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Tearfulness is typical of those who respond best 
to Asterias , and they feel better after crying. 
They like to have people around them, yet 
prefer to retain a degree of independence.  
If contradicted they may become angry 
and irritable, especially in hot weather. 
Asterias  is generally used in the treatment 
of left-sided symptoms that occur 
particularly in women, 
as well as for 
circulatory problems in both sexes. It also has the odd 
feature of apparently making old scars, 
particularly those in the breast area, become 
painful again.
Asterias  may benefit women who 
experience an increased sex drive so intense 
that it causes restless sleep, erotic dreams,  
a bad temper, and weepiness. Further 
symptoms that may respond to Asterias  
include obstinate constipation, particularly 
during menopause, hard, swollen glands in 
the armpits, or sharp pains in the breasts at 
night with a drawing sensation in the nipples, 
especially in the left breast. These symptoms 
may be accompanied by a high libido.
The remedy is also used for circulatory 
disorders such as strokes, especially if they 
are preceded by great impatience, dizziness, 
and muscle spasms in the limbs.
Symptoms better  After a headache; after 
crying; for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for cold, damp 
weather; at night; on the left side of the body; for 
menstruating; for being contradicted; for coffee.
Aurum chloratum
AURUM MUR.
COMMON NAME Gold chloride.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND The glass traditionally made from 
this reddish yellow crystal was called “ruby 
glass” by alchemists. It was also noted as a 
treatment for syphilis by the 16th-century 
scientist Paracelsus.
PREPARATION The crystals are dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Aurum mur .  is best suited to those who are 
restless, easily depressed, sensitive to 
humiliation, and anxious 
about developing diseases. 
These feelings may be eased 
by company , but can spiral into suicidal 
thoughts if left unchecked. The remedy may 
be prescribed for heart conditions such as 
palpitations and a sense of constriction in the 
chest, possibly associated with high blood 
pressure. Aurum mur .  is also used for edema 
(an irregular accumulation of fluid in the 
tissues or cavities of the body), with a feeling 
of congestion in the liver, kidneys, and 
genitals. Fibroids or cancer may also  
be helped.
Symptoms better  For cold weather; for 
bathing in cold water; for gentle movement.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; at night;  
for music.
See also Fibroids,  page 199 ; Cancer,  page 208Asclepias tuberosa
ASCLEPIAS TUB.
COMMON NAMES Pleurisy root, butterfly weed.
ORIGIN Native to the southern US.
BACKGROUND Traditionally considered a cure-
all in native American herbalism, pleurisy 
root was often used to treat fevers.
PREPARATION The fresh root is chopped and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those for whom Asclepias tub.  is most 
appropriate tend to be depressed, languid, 
and unable to concentrate.
Asclepias tub.  is associated particularly with 
rheumatic pain and catarrh, both tending  
to arise in damp weather. The rheumatic  
pain is characterized by stitchlike pains in  
the muscles and joints. The remedy may be 
prescribed for many forms of respiratory 
inflammation, such as bronchitis, influenza, 
pleurisy , or other feverish conditions with a 
painful, dry , hacking cough. The chest may 
feel warm with sharp pains, especially when 
breathing deeply . The above symptoms are 
often accompanied by copious perspiration, 
catarrh, and restless, uneasy sleep.
Symptoms better  For bending forward, which 
eases pain in the lungs.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for deep 
breathing; for lying down; in the morning;  
in winter.
Astacus fluviatilis
ASTACUS
COMMON NAMES Freshwater 
crayfish, river crab.
ORIGIN Found in the Gulf of 
Mexico and on the coast of the 
Atlantic Ocean.
BACKGROUND The common name 
of this crustacean derives from the old French 
word crevice , perhaps because it lives in the 
crevices between stones.
PREPARATION The live crayfish is pounded and 
then steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Astacus  is best suited to people who feel 
unprotected and vulnerable during 
transitional phases in their lives. They 
are often taciturn loners who desire 
calmness and clarity , but tend to be 
vague and absent-minded, their heads 
feeling full of cotton balls.
Astacus  has a strong affinity with the liver, 
digestion, glands, and skin. It is well known 
as a remedy for urticaria (hives), particularly ASTERIAS RUBENS   
(Red starfish)

•129 MINOR REMEDIES
Avena sativa
AVENA
COMMON NAME Oats.
ORIGIN Native to northern  
Europe, but now grown 
worldwide in  
temperate areas.
BACKGROUND Oats have  
a long history of 
medicinal use in 
Europe for a wide 
range of ailments. They 
are most often used in 
herbalism for general 
debility , eczema, and 
nervous conditions.
PREPARATION The fresh, 
green aerial parts in 
flower are expressed  
for their juice, which is 
mixed with alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Avena  is 
most appropriate are prone to mental and 
physical exhaustion accompanied by poor 
concentration. These people typically tend to be 
nervous or elderly . Alternatively , they may be 
feeling the effects of a drug or alcohol addiction.
Nervous exhaustion, great weakness, and  
a tendency to suffer chronic insomnia are key 
symptoms associated with the remedy . There 
may be a very low libido or male impotence, 
possibly linked with excessive sexual activity . 
The tincture is often prescribed as herbal 
drops rather than homeopathic pills.
Symptoms better  For open air.
Symptoms worse  For convalescence.
Bacillinum pulmo
BACILLINUM
COMMON NAME T ubercular lung tissue.
ORIGIN Tissue from a lung infected  
with tuberculosis.
BACKGROUND See information under 
Tuberculinum (see page 115 ).
PREPARATION Sterilized lung tissue is dissolved 
in purified water, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Melancholy and depression are typical in 
those who respond best to Bacillinum.  They tend to be taciturn, irritable, and snappy, 
and often whine and complain. Generally, 
they feel weak and do not want to be 
disturbed. They often start one task before 
completing another, and may have a fear  
of dogs.
The remedy has an affinity with the 
respiratory organs, and may be given 
constitutionally to those with a personal or 
family history of respiratory problems. It is 
typically prescribed for weak lungs, possibly 
involving shortness of breath, hacking coughs 
that disrupt sleep, purulent mucus, asthma, 
and sharp pain in the heart area that may be 
triggered by deep breathing.
Bacillinum  is also used for certain skin 
conditions, such as eczema on the eyelids, 
pimples that develop on the left cheek, 
ringworm on the scalp, alopecia areata 
(patchy loss of hair), and a susceptibility  
to fungal skin infections. Symptoms may 
occur independently or in conjunction with 
respiratory problems.
Symptoms better  In summer; for heat; for dry 
climates; for rest; for tight bandaging.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; in the early 
morning; at night.
See also Asthma,  page 181 ; Tuberculosis,  
page 182 ; Pneumonia,  page 183
Barium chloratum
BARYTA MUR.
COMMON NAME Barium chloride.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared from barium 
carbonate and hydrochloric acid.
BACKGROUND Barium chloride is mixed  
with sodium sulfate to form a white  
filler and pigment ( blanc fixe ) used in the 
manufacture of leather, rubber, cloth, and 
photographic paper.
PREPARATION The compound is dissolved in 
alcohol or triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Baryta mur .  has strong links with the nervous 
system. It is most appropriate for people with 
a predisposition to develop an aneurysm 
(ballooning of an artery).
The remedy is generally used for nervous 
symptoms, which may develop into manic 
nervous states. It is best suited to adults who 
behave “childishly” and to children who 
cannot play or interact with others because  
of their dullness or delayed mental 
development. Baryta mur .  may be prescribed 
for mental disability in children whose 
development is delayed, and for elderly 
people with retardation. Principal physical 
symptoms treated with this remedy include disorders of the nervous system such as 
seizures, perhaps occurring periodically , with 
stiffness, restlessness, and a loss of sensibility . 
The hands and feet may swell, and the limbs 
may feel paralyzed and heavy , with trembling 
and twitching.
Baryta mur .  is additionally used for acutely 
swollen glands, possibly the cervical or 
parotid glands, accompanied by a sore throat 
and possibly tonsillitis. Stroke symptoms  
or severe eczema may also respond to  
the remedy .
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For wet weather; in spring;  
in fall.
See also Stroke,  page 187 ; Severe eczema,  
page 194
Bellis perennis
BELLIS
COMMON NAMES English daisy , garden daisy , 
European daisy .
ORIGIN Found throughout Europe.
BACKGROUND In the 16th century the English 
herbalist John Gerard noted this plant as  
a treatment for gout. It has a long tradition  
of use as a medicinal herb, and is  
currently being tested as a treatment  
for HIV infection.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh plant, including 
the root, is gathered when in flower and 
steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Bellis  best suits people who are prone to 
restlessness, insomnia, and angry dreams. 
They are often sensitive to the cold.
Key conditions treated by Bellis  include 
muscle strain, sprains, and bruises, 
including deep bruising to the muscles such 
as that produced by soccer injuries to the 
thighs. It is also given to ease pain after 
surgery, or prolonged pain after injury. The 
remedy is appropriate where a tumor forms 
on the site of an old injury or scar.
Bellis  is also used to treat varicose veins 
and congestion of the veins, possibly when 
they are associated with physical labor. 
During pregnancy or following an abortion 
or miscarriage, the remedy may help ease 
pain and bruising in the uterus.
Symptoms better  For heat; for cold 
compresses; for continuous movement;  
for pressure on the painful area; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For becoming chilled when 
hot; for the warmth of the bed; before 
storms; for touch; for exertion; for childbirth; 
for injuries; for surgery; on the left side; for 
cold drinks.AVENA SATIVA  
(Oats)

130 •MINOR REMEDIES
Bismuthum metallicum
BISMUTH MET.
COMMON NAMES Bismuth, precipitated 
subnitrate of bismuth.
ORIGIN Found widely in nature, in 
hydrothermal veins and igneous rock.
BACKGROUND First discovered by a German 
monk called Basil Valentine in 1450, 
bismuth is widely used industrially in 
alloys, and its compounds are also used  
for medicinal purposes.
PREPARATION Bismuth is mixed with lactose 
sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Bismuth met.  is most suited to those who  
are experiencing great anguish, fear, and 
restlessness, with poor concentration.  
They have a desperate need for company  
and cannot bear to be alone. They often  
crave cold drinks.
This remedy is generally used for violent 
abdominal pains, possibly with burning and 
ulceration in the stomach, bowels, and throat. 
The pains may be accompanied by frequent 
belching and rumbling flatulence. Sleep is 
restless, with frequent waking and feelings  
of fright or a sensation of falling.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses; for 
company; for movement; for bending backward; 
for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For being alone; for eating.
Bothrops lanceolatus syn. Lachesis 
lanceolatus
BOTHROPS
COMMON NAMES Yellow pit viper, fer-de-lance.
ORIGIN Found from Mexico to Brazil and on 
many West Indian islands.
BACKGROUND The name fer-de-lance derives 
from this snake’s flat, lance-shaped mouth.  
A bite from the snake causes immediate 
swelling and intense pain.
PREPARATION Fresh venom is triturated with 
lactose sugar.Remedy profile
People who crave attention, have a strong 
desire to appear attractive, and possibly the 
feeling that they have been forsaken by others 
are most suited to Bothrops.  They may be 
either loquacious or, conversely , find it 
difficult to talk, forgetting words when they 
are speaking.
The characteristic symptom picture for 
Bothrops  is of problems of the blood or  
blood vessels. Symptoms include bruising, 
hemorrhaging of thin blood that will not clot, 
or severe premenstrual syndrome. The face 
may be bluish or dark red and bloated, and 
the right hand may turn blue. Sharp pain may 
radiate from the right nipple to the back, and 
become worse when raising the left arm or 
breathing deeply .
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  On the right side; after 
midnight; at sunrise; for walking; for taking  
a deep breath.
Brassica nigra syn. Sinapis nigra
SINAPIS
COMMON NAME Black mustard.
ORIGIN Native to the Middle East.
BACKGROUND This pungent, warming herb 
stimulates the digestive system and 
circulation. A mustard foot-bath is an old 
folklore cure for colds and headaches.
PREPARATION Mustard seeds are ground to  
a powder and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Sinapis  is given mainly to people who are 
irritable and become irritated for no reason. 
They have poor concentration, although 
studying and mental exercise make them  
feel better and focus their minds.
Classic conditions linked with Sinapis   
are hay fever, colds, and pharyngitis, with 
hot, dry mucous membranes. Further 
characteristic symptoms include sweat that 
forms on the upper lip and forehead, 
catarrh or mucus that feels cold, intense 
sneezing that is worse at night, and a 
feeling as if the blood vessels are filled  
with hot water. Colds tend to affect the  
left nostril in particular.
Symptoms better  For concentrating or studying; 
for sitting erect; for lying down  
at night; for shutting the eyes; for eating  
a good meal.
Symptoms worse  For a warm room; for damp 
weather; for summer; for touch or pressure  
on the affected area; for sitting forward and 
stooping; between 4 p.m. and 6 p.m. and  
7 p.m. and 9 p.m.Bromum
BROMUM
COMMON NAME Bromine.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND The name bromine comes from 
the Greek bromos , or “bad smell.” An acrid, 
browny red, smoking fluid, bromine is used 
as a water purifier, disinfectant, and bleach, 
and in the production of tear gas.
PREPARATION Bromine is dissolved in alcohol, 
then diluted and succussed.
Remedy profile
Bromum  is best suited to people with an 
underlying restlessness who tend to stay on the 
move or run away from situations. They are 
prone to anxiety and subject to the delusion that 
someone is behind them.
Respiratory problems treated by Bromum  
include colds that start in the larynx and travel 
upward or down to the chest. The nose and 
larynx may be irritated, with sneezing, catarrh, 
and hoarseness. An overheated room may cause 
hoarseness and an inability to speak.
A stony hardness is the most typical gland 
symptom treated by Bromum.  It is most likely  
to affect the thyroid, ovary , or testicle on the  
left side of the body .
Symptoms better  After nosebleeds; for 
shaving; for being at the seashore; for 
movement; for riding a horse.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for damp;  
for overheating; for getting chilled while  
hot; for bathing in the sea; for dust; for  
drafts; in the evening until midnight;  
for tobacco smoke; after eating.
Bufo bufo syn. Rana bufo
BUFO
COMMON NAMES Common toad, Brazilian toad.
ORIGIN Found in North America, Japan, 
southern Asia, and Europe.
BACKGROUND During the 19th century , native 
Brazilian women were known to give the 
toad’s venom to their husbands in food or 
drink to lower sexual vitality .
PREPARATION Venom secreted by the dorsal 
glands on the toad’s back is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Those prone to immature, childish behavior 
respond best to this remedy . They have a 
tendency to be emotionally underdeveloped  
or potentially even educationally subnormal  
but may be brilliant in one subject (idiot 
savant). Their faces may be characterized by a 
stupid and besotted expression. Particularly BISMUTHUM 
METALLICUM  
(Bismuth)

•131 MINOR REMEDIES
thick lips, which 
they may  
lick constantly ,  
are another  
classic feature.
The classic Bufo 
symptom picture is 
of seizures and skin 
problems, occurring 
either concurrently  
or independently ,  
and possibly with excessive 
sexual activity . T ypical skin symptoms include 
blisters and itching, burning pustules.
The sexual element of this remedy involves 
symptoms such as an extremely high sex drive, 
frequent masturbation, poorly developed sexual 
relationships, and even sexual depravity .
Symptoms better  For cool air; for bathing and 
putting the feet in hot water; for bleeding, 
especially in saliva or as a bloody discharge 
from the nipples.
Symptoms worse  During sleep; for warm 
surroundings; for the slightest movement;  
after an injury.
Cadmium metallicum
CADMIUM MET.
COMMON NAME Cadmium.
ORIGIN Found naturally in small quantities in 
minerals and ores, such as zinc, but prepared 
chemically for commercial use.
BACKGROUND This bluish white element was 
discovered by Frederick Stromeyer, a German 
chemist, in 1817. It is used in alloys, 
batteries, metal-plating, and magnets.
PREPARATION Cadmium is mixed with lactose 
sugar and triturated.Remedy profile
People for whom Cadmium met.  is best suited 
tend to be irritable, hypersensitive, and 
indifferent, and may avoid company .
The classic symptom profile associated with 
this remedy is of great fatigue, with dull aches 
all over the body , influenza-like symptoms, a 
poor memory , and difficulty in concentrating. 
Since these are symptoms associated by 
homeopaths with the effects of aluminum on 
the body (see page 72) , this remedy is often 
used as an antidote to aluminum exposure. 
There may be accompanying nausea or 
diarrhea with soft stools and a sensation 
as if there is a foreign body in the rectum.
More serious gastrointestinal symptoms 
may be helped by this remedy , such as 
painful abdominal bloating, colitis, or hernias 
in the diaphragm. It may also be used for 
constipation and hemorrhoids that tend  
to be aggravated by passing stools.
A feature of the remedy is that as the 
fatigue lessens, skin eruptions may appear on 
the skin, causing it to redden, burn, and itch, 
and perhaps develop pimples, blisters, or 
non-weeping eruptions.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the affected 
area; for cold compresses; for the development 
of skin eruptions; for eating.
Symptoms worse  In the morning; for 
movement; for mental exertion; on the left  
side of the body.
Cadmium sulphuricum
CADMIUM SULPH.
COMMON NAME Cadmium sulfate.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This mineral derives its name 
from the Greek word kadmia , meaning 
“earth.” It is used as a pigment in oil paints 
and printing ink.
PREPARATION Cadmium sulfate is triturated 
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Cadmium belongs to the same family on the 
periodic table as zinc and mercury , and the 
Cadmium  remedy shares some of the traits 
associated with the remedies based on those 
elements. When ill, these people are often 
chilly , exhausted, anxious, irritable, 
depressed, and have a fear of death. The more 
their illness progresses, the more they want to 
stay still, perhaps becoming faint on rising.
The remedy is typically used to treat stomach 
problems accompanied by sharp, cutting pains 
in the abdomen, a feeling of constriction, 
intense burning, and vomiting. There may be 
nausea so severe that the slightest touch to the lips will trigger abdominal pain and the  
retching of black or yellowy green vomit.
Symptoms better  For rest; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For open air; for getting up; 
for the slightest movement; after sleep.
See also Depression,  page 212
Caladium seguinum
CALADIUM
COMMON NAMES American arum, dumb cane, 
poison arum.
ORIGIN Found in the Caribbean islands, 
Guyana, and northern Brazil.
BACKGROUND This plant’s poison causes 
muteness and impotence: in the 17th and 
18th centuries, the men of the West Indian 
Maroons applied it to their wives’ sexual 
organs to suppress their libido and cause 
impotence in any man who seduced them.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh plant, including 
the root, is macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Caladium  is most appropriate for people  
who feel debilitated, nervous, restless, and 
forgetful, perhaps following a feverish illness. 
Illness depletes their energy levels and libido, 
despite a prior history of high sexual energy 
and a susceptibility to lascivious thoughts. 
Other symptoms include rough, dry , itchy 
skin and a marked craving for tobacco.
Symptoms better  After sweating; for sleeping 
in the daytime.
Symptoms worse  For movement.
Calcium fluoratum syn. Calcarea fluorica
CALC. FLUOR.
COMMON NAME Calcium fluoride.
ORIGIN Made originally from fluorspar 
(fluorite) found in Mexico, the UK, and  
the US, but now chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This gray-white powder is 
odorless, tasteless, and luminous when 
heated. Dr. Schüssler originally developed  
the remedy as one of his “biochemic” tissue 
salts (see page 90) .
PREPARATION Calcium fluoride is mixed  
with lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Anxiety is typical in those for whom this 
remedy is most appropriate, especially  
anxiety about health. They fear poverty  
and may be miserly or envious of others.
Calc. fluor .  is primarily used to treat 
disorders of the bones, teeth, joints, and 
musculoskeletal system. Key conditions 
associated with the remedy include bone BUFO BUFO  
(Common toad)

132 •MINOR REMEDIES
malnutrition and deformity , tumors and 
growths, possibly on the bones or the 
tendons, and swollen, inflamed joints that 
crack or dislocate easily on moving. Further 
symptoms associated with Calc. fluor .  include 
teeth that are prone to crumbling or breaking 
easily , and hard lumps that develop on the 
skull and jaw.
In addition, the remedy may be prescribed 
for the treatment of enlarged veins or  
varicose veins.
Symptoms better  For heat; for rubbing the 
affected area; for continued movement.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; on 
beginning to move; for sprains.
Calcium iodatum syn. Calcarea iodata
CALC. IOD.
COMMON NAME Calcium iodide.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND In large doses, this white, soluble 
powder may irritate the bowels, but it is also 
thought to prevent “rotting in the bowels” and 
to deodorize the stools.
PREPARATION Calcium iodide is dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
This remedy is most suitable for people  
who feel lightheaded, as if their head  
“isn’t there.” They may be indifferent to  
life and disinclined to work.
Key conditions linked with the Calc. iod.  
remedy are enlarged tonsils honeycombed 
with pits, glandular swellings, and fibroids. 
Adenoid complaints accompanied by frequent 
colds in children may respond to the remedy , 
as may thyroid enlargement during puberty . 
In certain cases, the glandular swellings, such 
as those in the breast, may become cancerous.
Symptoms better  For open air.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for the heat of 
the bed; at night; in cold weather.
See also Fibroids,  page 199Calcium silicatum syn. Calcarea silicata
CALC. SIL.
COMMON NAME Calcium silicate.
ORIGIN Occurs naturally as wollastonite,  
but usually prepared chemically .
BACKGROUND Calcium silicate is a vital 
constituent of glass and cement. In the food 
industry it is used as an anti-sticking agent  
in salt, rice, and candy .
PREPARATION The compound is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Those for whom Calc. sil.  is most suited  
tend to feel weak and cold, although 
overheating makes them feel worse. They  
may seem obsessed with dead friends and 
relatives, and may talk to the dead in their 
imaginations. Thrift and a lack of confidence 
are also typical in these people.
The remedy is used primarily for 
this state of mind in conjunction 
with skin conditions, especially 
severe acne or acne rosacea, boils, 
warts, or abscesses.
Symptoms better  For lying down, 
especially on the back.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touch; 
for jarring; in the evening; at night.
Calcium sulphuricum syn. Calcarea 
sulphurica
CALC. SULPH.
COMMON NAMES Gypsum, calcium sulfate.
ORIGIN Found widely in nature, forming in hot 
springs and clay beds.
BACKGROUND Gypsum is used to make  
plaster of Paris, which can be formed into  
a protective sheath to immobilize injuries.  
Dr. Schüssler developed the remedy as 
one of his “biochemic” tissue salts   
(see page 90) .
PREPARATION Gypsum is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Calc. sulph.  is best suited to people who 
tend to be timid and fearful, especially  
of birds. They may compensate for their  
timidity by being argumentative and bossy , 
and can be terribly jealous.
Suppurating, yellow discharges of pus are 
typically associated with this remedy. Calc. 
sulph.  is generally prescribed once the pus 
has “found a vent.” The pus may affect 
wounds and other skin conditions, such as 
eczema, as well as the mucous membranes, 
glands, and bones. Healing generally occurs slowly or not at all. T ypical mucous-
membrane discharges include thick, yellow-
colored catarrh accompanying a cold, or 
thick, yellow, lumpy mucus with a cough.
Symptoms better  For open air; for heat;  
for uncovering; for bathing.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for 
drafts; for walking rapidly.
See also Severe eczema,  page 194
Calendula officinalis
CALENDULA
COMMON NAMES Pot marigold, marigold.
ORIGIN Native to southern Europe, but now 
found throughout the world.
BACKGROUND The antiseptic and anti-
inflammatory properties of calendula have made 
it one of the longest established popular herbal 
remedies. Large amounts are grown in Russia, 
and it has been nicknamed “Russian penicillin.”
PREPARATION The finely chopped, fresh flowers 
and leaves are steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Calendula  is usually given to heal and soothe 
cuts and broken skin. It may prevent the 
development of disfiguring scars from torn 
and jagged wounds. In addition, non-
alcohol-based preparations of the remedy 
may soothe eczema.
Calendula  is prescribed internally and 
externally for leg and varicose ulcers, post-
operative wounds, and ruptured muscles or 
tendons. It may be used to treat torn perineal 
tissues following childbirth, joint wounds 
where there is loss of synovial fluid, and 
bleeding in the gums after a tooth extraction.
Symptoms better  For lying completely still;  
for walking.
Symptoms worse  For 
damp, cloudy weather; 
for drafts;  
for eating.CALCIUM FLUORATUM  
(Fluorspar)
CALENDULA 
OFFICINALIS  
(Pot marigold)

•133 MINOR REMEDIES
Camellia sinensis syn. Thea sinensis
THEA
COMMON NAME Tea.
ORIGIN Native to China, although now 
cultivated commercially , particularly in India, 
Sri Lanka, and China.
BACKGROUND Long established in many 
cultures as a beverage, tea is also used in 
Indian Ayurvedic medicine as a tonic for the 
digestive system and nerves.
PREPARATION The leaves are dried, then 
steeped in alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Thea is associated chiefly with an overactive 
nervous system. Those who respond best to it 
tend to be in a rather overwrought frame of 
mind, and are inclined to quarrel over the 
slightest things. Thea is given for extreme forms 
of behavior in children and adults, including 
irritability , mental restlessness, violent impulses, 
and even psychiatric problems. Adults may have 
murderous desires, perhaps toward their own 
children, or they may feel suicidal, especially at 
night when they are unable to sleep due to an 
overactive mind.
This overactivity of the nervous system 
causes physical symptoms such as insomnia, 
indigestion, and palpitations or other heart 
problems, which may be helped by Thea.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for bathing in 
warm water.
Symptoms worse  For walking in the open air; 
at night; after meals.
Cannabis sativa
CANNABIS SAT.
COMMON NAMES Marijuana, European hemp, 
American hemp, pot, weed.
ORIGIN Native to northern India, China, and 
Iran, but now cultivated worldwide.
BACKGROUND This plant is cultivated   
for its fiber and seeds and illegally as a 
recreational drug. It is closely related to 
Cannabis sativa  ‘Indica’  (see page 43) .
PREPARATION The tops of the male and female 
flowers are macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Cannabis sat.  is considered 
most suitable have a tendency to be rather 
dreamy , absentminded, and detached. They 
often have the feeling that everything is 
slightly unreal, and are easily debilitated.
The remedy is prescribed primarily for 
problems of the urinary and reproductive 
systems. It may be used for urogenital 
symptoms such as infections in the urinary tract, and cystitis with severe, burning pains and 
spasms that interrupt the flow of urine. T ypical 
reproductive system disorders associated with 
the remedy include discharges from or 
narrowing of the urethra, inflammation of the 
penis, and acute gonorrhea.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For urinating; for being 
approached by anyone; for looking at bright 
objects; for touch.
Capsella bursa-pastoris syn. Thlaspi 
bursa-pastoris
THLASPI
COMMON NAME Shepherd’s purse.
ORIGIN Native to Europe and Asia.
BACKGROUND This plant’s common name 
derives from its seed pods, which resemble 
heart-shaped purses. It was used in World 
War I to treat hemorrhaging.
PREPARATION The aerial parts, dried when  
in flower, are finely chopped and macerated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Predominantly a remedy given for problems 
of the female reproductive system, Thlaspi  is 
especially associated with fibroids and with 
hemorrhaging, particularly during pregnancy . 
The hemorrhaging is characteristically 
accompanied by great pain and violent 
cramping in the uterus. It may occur between 
menstrual periods, during pregnancy , 
following labor, or after a miscarriage or 
abortion. Menstrual flow tends to be 
excessively profuse and frequent, causing 
great exhaustion. Frequent nosebleeds are 
also a possible symptom during pregnancy .
Symptoms better  For bending over.
Symptoms worse  None known.
Capsicum annuum var. annuum
CAPSICUM
COMMON NAMES Chili pepper, sweet pepper, 
bell pepper.
ORIGIN Native to tropical America, and 
cultivated throughout Africa and India.
BACKGROUND The dried pods have long been 
used both as a hot spice in cooking, and as  
a stimulant and irritant in herbalism. The 
indigenous tribes of tropical America also 
used it as a local painkiller.
PREPARATION The dried pods are steeped in 
alcohol, then diluted and succussed.
Remedy profile
Capsicum  is best suited to those who are 
“peppery ,” discontented, and rather pessimistic. Homesickness or nostalgia  
often prevents them from fully 
engaging in their daily lives.
The classic symptom picture 
for this remedy is of low 
vitality , perhaps in the elderly or 
those debilitated by alcoholism 
or prostate conditions. Weakness 
is usually accompanied by slow 
healing processes, infections that 
tend to suppurate, and great 
sensitivity to drafts. Further typical 
symptoms include a raw, red, 
burning throat that smarts,  
as if from eating the pepper itself.
Symptoms better  For heat; for 
continued movement; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold air;  
for the least draft; for  
uncovering the affected  
area; for drinking or  
bathing in cold water.
See also Prostate problems,   
page 202
Carbo animalis
CARBO AN.
COMMON NAME Animal charcoal.
ORIGIN Charcoal made from oxhide.
BACKGROUND To make animal charcoal,  
oxhide is heated until luminescent, then 
transferred to an airtight environment.
PREPARATION Charcoal ash is triturated  
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Carbo an.  is typically prescribed for elderly 
people with strong nostalgia for the past and 
an aversion to modern life. They tend to feel 
chilly , feeble, abandoned, and that “everything 
was better in the old days.”
The remedy is mainly used for painful, 
slow-developing symptoms associated with 
old age, poor nutrition, and decay , such as 
swollen, painful veins, poor circulation with 
blue extremities, cancer, and great fatigue. 
Pains typically feel as if they are burning, 
cutting, or stabbing.
Carbo an.  is used particularly in the 
treatment of cancer, especially cancers of the 
glands or the uterus, and for distension of the 
abdomen after abdominal surgery .
Symptoms better  For warm rooms; for rubbing 
the eyes; for pressing the hand on the 
uncomfortable area.
Symptoms worse  For dry, cold air; after 
midnight; for shaving; for eating; for fatty  
foods and milk.
See also Cancer,  page 208CAPSICUM 
ANNUUM   
(Chili pepper)

134 •MINOR REMEDIES
Carbonium sulphuratum
CARBON SULPH.
COMMON NAMES Carbon bisulfide,  
carbon disulfide.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Carbon bisulfide is used as an 
industrial solvent in rubber works, and in the 
manufacture of synthetic fibers such as 
viscose, rayon, and cellophane.
PREPARATION The compound is dissolved in 
purified water, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People for whom Carbon sulph.  is best  
suited seem unable to think clearly . They may 
be either loquacious or respond slowly to  
others, forgetting words. In severe cases, they 
can be affected by dementia alternating with 
excitement, associated with fear, biting, sudden 
rage, or delusions of grandeur. At the ultimate 
extreme, they progress to complete breakdown, 
especially in their relationships, with a loss of 
dignity and confused sense of self. They may 
even attempt suicide and require restraining.
This pattern of breakdown is reflected in the 
physical conditions for which Carbon sulph.  is 
chiefly used. The body systems become 
“disorganized,” leading to muscle-wasting, 
jerking pains, visual disturbances with 
progressive vision loss and color blindness, 
widespread nerve inflammation, and digestive 
upsets. These symptoms may occur 
concurrently or in isolation.
Other important symptoms that may respond 
to the remedy include tinnitus, chronic sciatic 
pain and twitching, recurrent breathing 
difficulties, skin irritation, loss of sensation,  
and diarrhea or constipation.
Symptoms better  For open air; for warm drinks.
Symptoms worse  For bathing; during and  
after eating.
See also Tinnitus,  page 222
Castoreum
CASTOREUM
COMMON NAME Castoreum.
ORIGIN Secretion from glands in the genitals  
of the beaver.
BACKGROUND This browny red, resinous 
substance was formerly used in its dried form 
as a fixative in the perfume industry .
PREPARATION Castoreum is macerated in 
alcohol, filtered, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Castoreum  is primarily associated with 
women, particularly those with an angry , 
irritable, and quarrelsome state of mind that is especially evident during menstrual 
periods. Nervous and discontented, they tend  
to have anxious dreams, and to shout out 
angrily when they are asleep.
Castoreum  is generally used for this nervous 
state in conjunction with profuse sweats and a 
weird sensation that the tongue is being pulled 
back by a thread from its base to the hyoid bone 
in the neck. There is a tendency not to recover 
fully from any bout of illness, and the remedy 
may be given for chronic fatigue syndrome in 
women. Further symptoms may include sudden 
spasms of pain in the abdomen.
Symptoms better  For pressure on  
affected areas.
Symptoms worse  For cold; during 
menstruation; after debilitating diseases;  
for emotional stress.   
Caulophyllum thalictroides
CAULOPHYLLUM
COMMON NAMES Blue cohosh, squaw root, 
papoose root.
ORIGIN Native to eastern North America.
BACKGROUND Native Americans valued this 
plant highly for women, using it as a 
contraceptive, to regulate menstrual cycles,  
to induce labor, and for children’s colic.
PREPARATION The fresh root is macerated in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
This remedy is exclusively prescribed for 
symptoms in women who tend to be prone to 
restlessness, nervousness, and insomnia, if they 
have drunk too much coffee. In severe cases 
they may be unable to speak.
Caulophyllum  is used primarily for problems 
of the uterus, such as excessive bleeding and 
lack of tone in the uterine muscles. There may 
be erratic or absent uterine muscle action 
during menstruation or during or following 
labor. Inner trembling may also occur.
The remedy is also used for rheumatic joint 
pains affecting the small joints, particularly if 
they occur in conjunction with menstruation or 
uterine problems. The fingers, toes, and ankles 
may be stiff, and the wrists may ache.Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for coffee;  
in the evening.
Ceanothus americanus
CEANOTHUS
COMMON NAME New Jersey tea.
ORIGIN Native to eastern North America.
BACKGROUND Native Americans used the root 
to make a tea for fevers, catarrh, and sore 
throats. During the Revolutionary War, the 
leaves were used as a substitute for tea.
PREPARATION The dried leaves are steeped in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Ceanothus  is most suitable for people who  
feel apathetic and lack energy . They may be 
depressed by a fear of being unable to work 
due to illness.
The classic symptom picture is one of 
lethargy , with swelling, tenderness, and pain 
in the spleen. There may be such deep  
pain on the left side of the body that it is 
impossible to lie on this side. Further 
symptoms include palpitations, chilliness,  
a right-sided headache, and shortness of 
breath. The symptoms may be associated 
with serious blood or lymph disorders  
such as leukemia or Hodgkin’s disease.  
The remedy is also used for those who 
experience great nervous excitement, with 
chilliness and a loss of appetite. Their nerves 
may be so badly shaken that they can barely 
hold a knife and fork.They may find it 
difficult to sleep, and may experience 
dreams of snakes and robbers.
Symptoms better  For warm weather.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather; 
for movement; for lying on the left side.
Centella asiatica syn. Hydrocotyle 
asiatica
HYDROCOTYLE
COMMON NAMES Gotu kola, Indian pennywort, 
tiger grass.
ORIGIN Native to India, and found in Sri 
Lanka, south China, and southwest Asia.
BACKGROUND Gotu kola has long been used in 
India as a meditation aid. It is also an important 
herbal remedy in Indian Ayurvedic medicine, 
notably for leprosy and as a “tonic” herb.
PREPARATION The dried aerial parts of the plant 
are macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Hydrocotyle  is best suited to people who 
alternate between lively , talkative behavior and CAULOPHYLLUM THALICTROIDES  
(Blue cohosh)

•135 MINOR REMEDIES
dull sadness, with a desire to be  
alone. They may sleep heavily , 
sometimes with persistent 
dreaming all night long.
Classic features 
associated with this 
remedy are 
overgrowth and 
hardening, which often 
manifests itself as thickening 
or hardening of the connective 
tissue, or scaly , thickening skin 
conditions. T ypical skin 
conditions treated include 
psoriasis, with 
hardening and scaling of the affected area, 
lupus (scaly patches that leave dull white 
scars), and leprosy with no ulceration. The 
remedy may even be used for excessive skin 
thickening, swelling, and distortion, like that 
occurring in elephantiasis (a chronic disease 
of the lymphatic system).
Symptoms better  For rubbing the affected area.
Symptoms worse  In summer; at night; for 
movement; for pressure on the affected area; 
on the left side.
Chamaelirium luteum syn. Helonias dioica
HELONIAS
COMMON NAMES False unicorn root, devil’s bit, 
fairy wand, blazing star.
ORIGIN Native to eastern North America.
BACKGROUND The plant was long used by 
native Americans to prevent miscarriage,  
and is still considered invaluable for many 
gynecological disorders by herbalists.
PREPARATION The fresh, finely chopped root 
and rhizome are steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Characteristically , those who respond to 
Helonias  are melancholy and depressed, and 
have a tendency to feel better when mentally 
or physically occupied.
Helonias  is used primarily for women’s 
problems accompanied by severe fatigue. This 
exhaustion or enervation is often caused by 
excessive physical or mental exertion or is, 
conversely , the result of a hedonistic lifestyle.
It may also be associated with the extreme 
physical demands of frequent pregnancies or 
terminations. There is extreme sensitivity to and awareness of the uterus. Problems of the 
female reproductive system that may be 
treated with Helonias  include suppressed 
menstruation, uterine prolapse with a sensation 
of weakness and dragging in the 
sacrum and pelvis, and a 
congested feeling in the 
kidneys, as if the 
menstrual flow has moved to that 
area. The remedy may also be used to 
treat edema (retention of fluid in the tissues) 
after uterine hemorrhage.
Symptoms better  For being busy; for holding 
the abdomen.
Symptoms worse  For fatigue; for touch; for 
movement; for stooping; for the pressure of 
clothes; for pregnancy.
Chenopodium ambrosioides var. 
anthelminticum
CHENOPODIUM
COMMON NAMES American wormseed, Jesuit’s 
tea, Mexican tea, Jerusalem oak.
ORIGIN Native to the Caribbean and to Central 
and South America, and cultivated in China 
and the US.
BACKGROUND This plant was widely used from 
the middle of the 18th century by native 
Americans to expel worms.
PREPARATION The seeds or whole, fresh plant 
are macerated in alcohol, or the oil from the 
seeds is diluted with alcohol.
Remedy profile
The classic use of Chenopodium  is in treating 
the effects of a stroke, particularly if they 
involve right-sided paralysis.
T ypical symptoms include repeating 
words or using inappropriate words, or 
repeating the same actions over and over 
again. The limbs may spasm and contract, 
and the hands may flex. These symptoms 
may be accompanied by very heavy 
breathing with a rattling sound, as if there 
is a ball rolling loose in the trachea. The 
remedy is also used to treat right-sided 
migraines with giddiness, loss of sight, 
roaring in the ears, and dull pain in the 
liver area that may extend to the right 
shoulder blade.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For movement.
Chimaphila umbellata
CHIMAPHILA
COMMON NAMES Prince’s pine, ground holly , 
pipsissewa, umbellate wintergreen.ORIGIN Found in North America, Asia,  
and Europe.
BACKGROUND By the 19th century this  
native American remedy for sweating  
and fevers was adopted by European 
settlers for rheumatic pain and  
urinary problems.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh plant, or aerial 
parts in flower, are steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those who respond best to this remedy tend 
to feel restless and hot but seem unable to 
sweat. They tremble inwardly , yet are 
outwardly calm and stable.
Chimaphila  is used chiefly for urinary 
tract problems such as painful urination 
and obstructed urine flow. It is given for 
cystitis with blood in the urine and great 
urging to urinate despite an empty bladder. 
In men it is also prescribed for an enlarged 
prostate, urine retention, and a feeling that 
there is a ball in the pelvis.
Symptoms better  For walking.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for sitting 
on cold stone; on starting to urinate.
See also Prostate problems,  page 202
Chininum arsenicosum
CHINA ARS.
COMMON NAME Quinine arsenite.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This compound of quinine   
(see page 49) , arsenious acid, and potassium 
carbonate is little used outside homeopathy .
PREPARATION Quinine arsenite is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
People for whom China ars.  is appropriate 
tend to be exhausted and drained, and to feel 
that they cannot endure their state for much 
longer. They are either restless and on edge  
or completely relaxed.
The key symptom treated by China ars.   
is great fatigue, perhaps following chronic 
fatigue syndrome, or serious illness such  
as malaria or a debilitating epileptic attack. 
The fatigue tends to recur at specific times, 
possibly with burning pains, stiff joints, 
and fluttering “electric” pulses in the body. 
The remedy may also be given to treat 
asthma with a sensation of suffocation, 
oppressed breathing, and anxiety.
Symptoms better  For open air; for pressure  
on the affected area; for bending forward;  
for sitting up; for yawning.
Symptoms worse  In the morning; for 
movement; for hunger.CENTELLA 
ASIATICA   
(Gotu kola)

136 •
Another key use of Chionanthus  is for 
headaches, especially those associated with 
nervous tension or menstruation, or 
accompanied by digestive upsets.
Symptoms better  For lying on the abdomen.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for jarring.
Chocolatum
CHOCOLATE
COMMON NAME Chocolate.
ORIGIN Made from the fruits 
of the Theobroma cacao  
tree, native to Central 
America and grown in 
other tropical areas.
BACKGROUND Used for 
centuries by the Maya 
and Aztecs in a bitter 
drink called xocolatl , 
cocoa was brought to 
Europe by Christopher 
Columbus in 1502. 
The Europeans then gradually developed 
this import into the chocolate that has 
become so popular in modern times.
PREPARATION Dark, high-cocoa-mass chocolate  
is triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
This remedy is primarily used for a classic state 
of mind rather than a set of physical symptoms. 
People for whom Chocolate  is best suited tend  
to lack concentration and to feel anxious, 
vulnerable, and self-conscious, as if they are 
being watched. They are prone to fears of cars, 
accidents, illness, dogs, or being attacked. They 
may feel estranged from loved ones, and believe 
that they do not belong anywhere. This state  
of mind can develop into withdrawal and 
antisocial behavior, associated particularly  
with a reluctance to talk and a desire to be  
alone in the evening.
Although used chiefly for emotional 
states, the symptom picture for Chocolate  
may include physical symptoms such as 
constriction in the chest or head, and 
nervous disorders associated with great 
clumsiness and heaviness in the limbs.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for being 
covered up.
Symptoms worse  In the evening; on waking; for 
eating chocolate or sweets; for drinking tea.
Cicuta virosa
CICUTA
COMMON NAMES Water hemlock, cowbane.
ORIGIN Found in swamps and wet places in 
Kashmir and the Arctic.MINOR REMEDIES
Chininum sulphuricum
CHINA SULPH.
COMMON NAME Quinine sulfate.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This compound is one of the 
quinine salts used in conventional medicine  
to treat malaria  (see page 49) .
PREPARATION The compound is dissolved in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
A great fear of impending misfortune or 
extreme anxiety about the future is typical  
in those most responsive to China sulph.   
They often seem bad-tempered, nervous, 
indifferent, weepy , and depressed. They  
may have difficulty naming objects.
Classic physical symptoms linked to China 
sulph.  include heavy , aching limbs, joint pains, 
and a tender, sensitive spine that feels worse  
for pressure. There may be a sinking sensation 
when lying down, as if falling through the bed. 
The remedy may also be used for tinnitus, 
severe head pain, and recurrent fever, possibly 
due to malaria. Symptoms often recur at the 
same time each day , particularly at around 3 p.m.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses; for 
yawning; for bending forward; for pressure on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touch; at particular 
times of day; at around 3 p.m.
See also Tinnitus,  page 222
Chionanthus virginicum
CHIONANTHUS
COMMON NAME Fringe tree.
ORIGIN Native to the US but now also found in 
eastern Asia.
BACKGROUND Traditionally used to treat mouth 
ulcers, spongy gums, and eye inflammation by 
native Americans and early European settlers in 
the 18th century .
PREPARATION The chopped bark of the fresh root 
is macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Chionanthus  is most appropriate for those who 
are insular, melancholic, and gloomy , with 
hypochondriac tendencies. They feel “played 
out,” apathetic, and listless, and may develop 
nervous exhaustion.
The remedy is generally used for liver 
problems such as jaundice, gallstones, and 
biliary colic, with the characteristic fatigue. 
Liver pain is usually accompanied by colic, 
cramps, vomiting, and the feeling that the 
intestines are being spasmodically squeezed. 
The stools may be pale due to lack of bile.  BACKGROUND The name “cowbane” derives from 
the fact that grazing on the plant can transmit  
a potentially fatal disease to cattle.
PREPARATION The fresh root, gathered when the 
plant is in bloom, is chopped and macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Cicuta  has an affinity with the nervous 
system and is used both for nervous 
temperamental conditions and for physical 
disorders of the nervous system. It is 
generally given to people who behave 
childishly and do absurd things. They may 
be wild, delirious, and overexcited, or 
exhibit great sensitivity to sad stories and to 
the happiness of other people. Alternatively, 
they may be distrustful, despise other 
people, and have an aversion to society. 
Their memories can go blank for long 
periods. Classic physical symptoms 
associated with Cicuta  focus on spasmodic 
effects on the nervous system, ranging from 
stammering and hiccups to sudden, strong 
jerks and spasms. Petit mal fits with long 
absences may be treated with the remedy,  
as may epilepsy or violent convulsions 
accompanied by facial contortions and 
severe backward twisting and arching  
of the head and neck.
The remedy may also be used for some 
skin disorders, often involving pustules that 
leave yellowish scabs, such as eczema or 
impetigo. The head and face may be most 
affected, or the whole body may develop 
chronic eruptions that itch, burn, and crust. 
A craving for chalk may occur, as may an 
inability to distinguish what is edible.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for arching the 
head, neck, and spine backward; for dwelling  
on pain; directly after eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for being touched or 
jarred; during sleep; for noise; if skin symptoms 
are suppressed or diminished but not cured;  
for intestinal worms; after concussion.
See also Severe eczema,  page 194
Cinnamomum camphora syn.  
Laurus camphora
CAMPHORA
COMMON NAME Camphor.
ORIGIN Native to Indochina and Japan, but now 
found in tropical and subtropical regions 
throughout the world.
BACKGROUND Commonly used as a moth 
repellent, camphor is also a strong  
narcotic, and was praised by the famous 
16th-century scientist Paracelsus for its 
“cooling” effect on brain disorders. It is THEOBROMA 
CACAO  (Coco 
pod and seeds)

•137 MINOR REMEDIES
considered by some to be a universal 
antidote for homeopathic remedies.
PREPARATION The gum of the tree is dissolved  
in alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Contradictory symptoms, contrariness, and 
emotional and physical coldness are typical in 
those who respond best to Camphora . They 
crave sympathy , but may be quarrelsome, 
aggressive, and depressed.
Camphora  made its reputation as a treatment 
for cholera  (see pages 16 and 65), but is now 
used primarily for the initial stages of a cold 
with chills and sneezing. There may be great 
heat and perspiration with a desire to remain 
covered up, or chilliness with a desire to be 
uncovered. Other possible accompanying 
symptoms include insomnia and restless sleep 
or, conversely , deep, comatose sleep.
Symptoms better  For thinking about symptoms, 
especially pain; for sweating.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for drafts; for 
suppressing discharges.
Cistus canadensis
CISTUS
COMMON NAMES Frostweed, Canadian rock rose.
ORIGIN Found in North America.
BACKGROUND Frostweed’s name derives from its 
love of frost on its roots in early winter. It has 
been used herbally for ulcers.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh plant and root are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Cistus  is most appropriate for those who are 
frightened and stressed. Mental stress often 
aggravates their physical symptoms. Extremely 
sensitive to cold air, they tend to feel cold 
sensations all over the body . Their illnesses 
are generally affected by the seasons, becoming 
worse in winter.
Cistus  is used mainly for frequent colds, 
tonsillitis, upper respiratory tract infections, 
chronic or recurrent sinusitis, and allergic 
rhinitis. T ypical symptoms include thick, 
yellowy catarrh, a runny nose, and violent 
sneezing. The throat is dry and feels sore if  
even small amounts of cold air are inhaled.
Another key symptom associated with 
Cistus  is glandular swelling and hardening, 
particularly in the neck, and possibly with 
concurrent respiratory symptoms. It may be 
due to infection or even cancer.
Symptoms better  For coughing up mucus; for 
swallowing; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for drafts; for touch; 
for winter.Clematis recta
CLEMATIS
COMMON NAMES Clematis, upright virgin’s bower.
ORIGIN Native to central and southern Europe.
BACKGROUND This plant irritates the skin on 
contact, but is used by herbalists to treat sores, 
skin ulcers, and itchy rashes.
PREPARATION The fresh leaves and stems of the 
plant are macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Clematis  is best suited tend 
to be peevish, dissatisfied, and prone to 
melancholy or homesickness. Despite apathy 
toward friends, they generally fear being 
alone. They often feel confused in stuffy 
rooms, and improve in open air.
Clematis  is strongly indicated for skin 
complaints and swollen glands, especially if they 
arise simultaneously or if there is a history of 
both conditions. The remedy is given for moist, 
itchy , sensitive pustules that erupt on the back 
of the head or skull.
Gland symptoms that indicate Clematis  
include hardness, swelling, and pain. The 
prostate, testes, ovaries, or breasts are most 
often affected. Further related symptoms may 
include urethral inflammation, which causes 
an aversion to sexual intercourse, and 
abnormal urine flow. The right side of the 
body is usually particularly affected. Clematis  
may also be given for a toothache that is 
worse for hot drinks, better for the cold.
Symptoms better  For sweating; for open air; 
during a waning moon.
Symptoms worse  At night; for cold air; for 
bathing in cold water; for the heat of the bed;  
for touch; for movement; during a new moon.
Colchicum autumnale
COLCHICUM
COMMON NAMES Meadow saffron, fall crocus, 
naked ladies.
ORIGIN Found wild in Europe and Africa, and 
cultivated in North America.
BACKGROUND During classical times, the plant 
was considered too toxic for use. Arabian 
physicians used it in the Middle Ages for joint 
pain and gout.
PREPARATION The fresh bulb, dug up in spring,  
is chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those who respond well to Colchicum  are 
typically weak and restless. They may be 
depressed or irritable, and have poor 
concentration and memory , so that they appear 
dazed even though they may answer questions correctly . There is a marked absence of any 
apprehension and no discernible fear of death.
The key symptoms linked with Colchicum  
focus on the muscle tissues and joint 
membranes, especially the membranes in the 
small joints. The joints may be painful, hot, and 
swollen, and the muscles extremely relaxed and 
even limp. Arthritic joint pain or gout may be 
so severe that it causes screaming if the joints 
are touched or jolted. There may be a twitching, 
tingling sensation all over the body .
Colchicum  is also considered a useful remedy 
for ulcerative colitis and for nausea with colicky 
pains and painful distension of the abdomen. 
Illness is typically accompanied by a feeling  
of icy coldness in the stomach.
In addition to any other symptoms, the  
body may feel cold inside, with extreme 
oversensitivity to external stimuli such as bright 
lights, strong odors, physical contact, and even 
other people’s behavior.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rest; after 
passing stools.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for 
changeable weather; for vibrations or jarring.
See also Ulcerative colitis,  page 190 ; 
Rheumatoid arthritis,  page 197
Collinsonia canadensis
COLLINSONIA
COMMON NAMES Stoneroot, horsebalm, richweed.
ORIGIN Native to moist woodlands in eastern 
North America.
BACKGROUND Stoneroot is so called due to its 
hard, knotted root. It is used herbally in a 
poultice for bruises and sores.
PREPARATION The fresh root is chopped and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Collinsonia  is best suited to people who  
have a gloomy temperament. They tend  
to experience strange bodily sensations, 
including the feeling that the body is being 
pricked by needles, that it is enlarged, and 
that the lower limbs are disembodied.
The classic symptom for this remedy is of 
sore, bleeding hemorrhoids, with a sensation 
of constriction, pricking pain, and sharp sticks 
in the rectum, which is prone to fissures.
Collinsonia  is also used for menstrual  
pain, pelvic aches, and labor or pregnancy  
problems such as an itchy vulva during 
pregnancy , or diarrhea after labor. It is 
especially appropriate if symptoms occur  
with rectal or bowel disorders.
Symptoms better  For heat; in the morning.
Symptoms worse  At night; for cold; during 
pregnancy; for emotional stress.

138 •MINOR REMEDIES
Comocladia dentata
COMOCLADIA
COMMON NAMES Guao, bastard Brazil wood.
ORIGIN Native to Cuba.
BACKGROUND This tree exudes a milky sap that 
turns black on contact with air and stains 
clothes and skin. It causes a violent skin 
reaction in people who have sensitive skins.
PREPARATION The fresh leaves and bark are 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Comocladia  is most appropriate for irritable 
people who are prone to maliciousness, gloomy 
behavior, and restlessness while awake. Sleep 
refreshes them, however, and they enjoy vivid, 
pleasant, and perhaps even clairvoyant dreams. 
The key physical symptoms associated with 
this remedy include nerve sensitivity and skin 
problems such as extreme itching, burning, 
inflammation, and blistering. The skin may 
flake or shed itself, or it may redden, 
possibly forming stripes. There may be 
ulceration or other swelling, which may  
be fever-related.
Symptoms better  For open air; for 
scratching; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for touch;  
for rest; in the evening.
Convallaria majalis
CONVALLARIA
COMMON NAME Lily-of-the-valley .
ORIGIN Native to Europe, but also found 
across North America and in northern Asia.
BACKGROUND The 16th-
century herbalist John 
Gerard praised this plant 
for its success in treating 
gout and heart problems.  
It is used in modern 
herbalism, particularly  
for heart disorders.
PREPARATION The fresh, flowering 
aerial parts are macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Convallaria  
have difficulty in thinking, because 
their brains feel dull. They often find 
themselves unable to concentrate when 
reading, and tend to become irritable 
when questioned. There is a tendency 
to experience feelings of depression. 
Convallaria  is prescribed primarily for 
heart problems. T ypical heart symptoms 
treated by the remedy include palpitations triggered by the slightest exertion. 
The heartbeat may seem to reverberate 
throughout the whole chest and rib cage, or it 
may become fluttery and irregular after exercise, 
possibly causing nausea and breathlessness. 
Water retention may accompany heart 
problems, as may poor circulation. The remedy 
is often given for heart palpitations that occur in 
conjunction with soreness of the uterus.
Symptoms better  For open air.
Symptoms worse  For warm rooms; for lying on 
the back.Copaifera officinalis
COPAIVA
COMMON NAME Balsam of copaiva.
ORIGIN Native to tropical South America, but also 
found in southern Africa.
BACKGROUND This traditional native Brazilian 
remedy for healing wounds and removing scars 
was first recorded in 1625 by a Portuguese 
monk, Manoel Tristaon.
PREPARATION A tincture of balsam is made from 
oleoresin (a semi-solid mixture of resin and 
essential oil) from the plant.
Remedy profile
Copaiva  is given to restless, overwrought people 
who are prone to burning pains, and a feeling  
of heaviness or pressure on any part of the body . 
Their nervous system is oversensitive, and they 
tend to feel startled when they hear noises, and 
to weep on hearing piano music.  
A key symptom associated with 
the remedy is excessive discharge 
from the mucous membranes. This 
includes urinary tract discharges, catarrh 
during a cold, and profuse, greenish gray , 
offensive-smelling mucus during a bout of 
chronic bronchitis. The remedy is also used  
as a treatment for mucus discharges 
associated with leucorrhea (abnormal 
discharge from the vagina), urethritis 
(inflammation of the urethra),  
and gonorrhea.
Symptoms better  For pressure on the 
affected area; for walking; for doubling 
over; for perspiring.
Symptoms worse  In the morning; for 
catching cold; for starchy foods.
Corallium rubrum
CORALLIUM
COMMON NAME Red coral.
ORIGIN The Gorgonia nobilis  species of coral, 
which is found mainly in the waters of the 
Mediterranean and Japan.
BACKGROUND Coral is the skeleton of a tiny 
animal called the coral polyp. Red coral’s 
delicate, pink skeleton is largely comprised  
of calcium, and is commonly used to make 
jewelry and prayer beads.
PREPARATION Pieces of skeleton are mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Corallium  is most appropriate for critical, 
peevish, angry people who tend to swear and 
curse when they are in pain. They may have a 
craving for sour foods, and like wine but easily 
become stupefied and drunk. Prone to extreme CONVALLARIA MAJALIS  
(Lily-of-the-valley)

•139 MINOR REMEDIES
tiredness, they may even fall asleep when 
standing up. The remedy is used chiefly for 
whooping and spasmodic coughs, which tend 
to occur in rapid, frequent fits, accompanied by 
violent paroxysms, exhaustion, a smothering 
sensation, and the bringing up of blood. The 
face may become purple and congested. The air 
passages may feel cold on breathing in deeply , 
and there may be profuse catarrh. The throat  
is very sensitive, especially to air.
Symptoms better  For heat; for open air;  
for covering up; for sitting; in the afternoon  
and evening.
Symptoms worse  For inhaling in the open air;  
for moving from a warm to a cold room;  
for eating.
Crataegus laevigata syn. C. oxyacantha,  
or C. monogyna
CRATAEGUS
COMMON NAMES Hawthorn, May  
tree, whitethorn.
ORIGIN Found in all temperate regions of the 
Northern Hemisphere.
BACKGROUND Hawthorn is an extremely valuable 
medicinal herb, used since the Middle Ages  
as a heart remedy . Modern trials have shown 
that it improves the heart rate and lowers  
blood pressure.
PREPARATION The fresh, ripe berries are chopped 
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Crataegus  is most appropriate for irritable, cross, 
melancholic people who are prone to heart 
complaints. They tend to feel weak, fragile, and 
despairing. Their brains feel dull and confused, 
with possible periods of quiet and calm.
The characteristic symptom picture for  
the remedy is of a weak heart, palpitations,  
and a rapid heartbeat with a sense of hurry  
and urgency . The pulse is fast, feeble, and 
intermittent. Fainting and collapse may 
accompany palpitations, while the area  around the heart can feel as though it is bursting 
due to congestion or overexertion.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for quiet; for rest; 
during menstruation; for washing.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for sweating; in the 
morning; in the evening.
Crocus sativus
CROCUS
COMMON NAME Saffron crocus.
ORIGIN Native to India and the Balkans, and now 
cultivated in Spain, France, Italy , and the  
Middle East.
BACKGROUND It takes roughly 150,000 flowers 
and 400 hours’ work to make 2 lb (1 kg)  
of dried saffron, making it the most costly  
spice in the world.
PREPARATION The dried stigmas of the plant are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
The range of key symptoms for which Crocus   
is generally prescribed includes nervous 
excitement, alternating moods, sensation as  
if something is moving inside the abdomen,  
and hemorrhages with dark, clotted, stringy 
blood, usually in the form of nosebleeds  
or uterine bleeding.
Crocus  is taken for rapidly alternating mental 
and physical states. The nervous system is 
overexcited, causing mood swings and 
hysterical, excited behavior. The feeling that 
something is moving inside the abdomen may 
be linked to general nervous hyperactivity . 
Hopping or jumping sensations may be felt 
inside the abdomen; these may be linked to  
a false pregnancy .
Symptoms better  For open air; for yawning;  
after breakfast.
Symptoms worse  For movement; during 
pregnancy; for puberty; for changes of the moon; 
for fasting; for a warm room.
Crotalus durissus terrificus syn. C. cascavella
CROTALUS CASC.
COMMON NAME South American rattlesnake.
ORIGIN Found in South America.
BACKGROUND This snake can grow up 5 ft (1.5 m) 
long. It has a deadly venom that primarily 
affects the nervous system.
PREPARATION Fresh venom is mixed with lactose 
sugar and then triturated.
Remedy profile
This remedy is most appropriate for people  
who feel jealous and forsaken. They fear being 
alone and love crowds and activity . They are 
frequently hypochondriacs who are sensitive to the cold. Characteristically they tend to be 
preoccupied by death and dying, and their 
dreams may feature corpses. They may feel that 
they are being haunted by ghosts. Right-sided 
symptoms are generally predominant.
Crotalus casc.  is typically used for this  
state of mind in conjunction with a sense  
of constriction, which is sometimes felt as  
a band around the throat or abdomen, so  
that wearing clothes causes discomfort.  
It is used for burning urticaria in crops over  
a single body region.
Symptoms better  For open air.
Symptoms worse  For cold; at night; on the  
right side; for washing; for menopause;  
for drinking.
Croton tiglium
CROTON
COMMON NAME Croton.
ORIGIN Found in subtropical and tropical forests 
from India to Malaysia.
BACKGROUND Croton oil, made from the pressed 
seeds, has been used as a drastic purgative. An 
overdose of this carcinogenic oil may cause 
shock, while contact with the skin may lead  
to blistering.
PREPARATION The oil from the seeds is percolated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Croton  is most suitable tend  
to be “pent-up” emotionally . Often they feel 
anxious, as if some personal misfortune is  
about to befall them. They tend to be  
exhausted, dissatisfied, and morose, with  
an inability to work or think of anything  
except themselves.
Mirroring the uses of the oil itself, which  
is strongly purgative and irritant, Croton’s  main 
affinities are with the skin and digestion.  
The remedy is typically used for allergic skin 
conditions with extreme itching, such as  
eczema on the scrotum, or blistering rashes  
on the scrotum and penis. Croton  is also given 
for digestive problems such as nausea and 
urgent diarrhea immediately after eating  
or drinking.
A key symptom is the strange sensation that  
a string has been attached to the eyes or the 
nipples and is pulling them inward. The eyes 
feel as if they are being drawn backward into 
the head, and there is tense pain over the right 
eye, causing headaches.
Symptoms better  After sleep; for gently rubbing 
the affected area; for warm milk.
Symptoms worse  For touch; in summer; as  
skin eruptions are disappearing; for drinking;  
for eating.CRATAEGUS LAEVIGATA  
(Hawthorn)

140 •MINOR REMEDIES
Cuprum arsenicosum
CUPRUM ARS.
COMMON NAMES Copper arsenite, Scheele’s green.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This toxic, yellow-green pigment 
was used in wallpapers until a link was 
established between it and a multitude of 
health problems, especially digestive disorders 
and cramps.
PREPARATION The compound is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Those who respond best to Cuprum ars.   
are often confused, restless, and in anguish. 
Their body functions are also confused and 
disturbed, with chilliness and periods of 
irregular or weak heart function. Their bodies 
tremble, especially when walking, or they  
may be prostrated.
A key condition associated with Cuprum ars.  
is poor kidney function. T ypical symptoms 
include burning pain on urinating, dark red, 
discolored urine with a strong odor, perhaps  
of garlic, and diarrhea. The remedy may also  
be given to those who have experienced 
prolonged fluid loss, perhaps after injury  
or an operation.
Symptoms better  For hard pressure on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For damp; for touch; for 
movement; during diarrhea attacks.
Cyclamen europaeum
CYCLAMEN
COMMON NAMES Cyclamen, sowbread.
ORIGIN Found throughout Europe.
BACKGROUND In the 1st century CE Pliny the 
Elder noted the use of this plant as an 
arrowhead poison in ancient Rome. The name 
“sowbread” refers to the medieval practice of 
feeding the roots to swine.
PREPARATION The fresh root, gathered in spring, 
is chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Cyclamen  is best suited to rather dutiful, 
conscience-stricken people who tend to find 
fault with themselves and others. Prone to 
drowsiness, gloominess, and depression, they 
may wish to be alone and cry or weep silently , 
or they may have a sense of joy that alternates 
with irritability .
The symptom picture for Cyclamen  typically 
focuses on menstrual problems and indigestion. 
The remedy is used when the menstrual flow  
is irregular, possibly too frequent, or absent. 
Blood flow may be profuse and black, or the blood may clot too rapidly , and there may  
be severe pains resembling those felt during 
labor. Migraines, a squint, or visual 
disturbances may accompany these symptoms.
Extreme indigestion that is aggravated by 
eating fats is another condition suitable for 
treatment with Cyclamen.
Symptoms better  For movement; for rubbing the 
affected area; for weeping; during menstruation.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for open air; before 
menstruation; for suppression of menstrual flow 
due to shock or extreme cold; for sitting;  
for standing.
Dactylopius coccus syn. Coccus cacti
COCCUS CACTI
COMMON NAME Cochineal beetle.
ORIGIN Found in Spain, Mexico, and the  
West Indies.
BACKGROUND The dried bodies of the female 
insects are used as a scarlet dye and food 
coloring, and in cosmetics, inks, artists’ 
pigments, and medicines.
PREPARATION The fertilized females are killed  
by heat, then dried and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Coccus cacti  is generally prescribed for 
spasmodic coughing associated with catarrh, 
and for urinary problems with pain in the 
kidneys, particularly in those who are anxious 
and confused.
The remedy is used for spasmodic coughing, 
especially whooping cough, and for asthma. 
Symptoms are usually worse in the mornings, 
and include frequent, violent, ticklish coughing 
fits accompanied by vomiting and retching up 
of clear, thick mucus that may hang from the 
mouth. There is a sensation as if a thread is 
hanging down the back of the throat. The 
mucous membranes in the throat may feel so 
sensitive that even brushing the teeth causes 
retching and vomiting.
Symptoms better  For bathing in cold water; for 
walking; for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  On the left side of the body; 
for lying down; after sleep; for touch; for the 
pressure of clothing; for the slightest exertion; 
for brushing the teeth; for rinsing the mouth.
See also Asthma,  page 181
Daphne mezereum
MEZEREUM
COMMON NAMES Mezereon, spurge olive.
ORIGIN Native to Eurasia and found in North 
America, Europe, and north Africa.
BACKGROUND Herbalists in northern Europe once 
used the plant to treat skin ulcers and cancers, but today mezereon is considered too  
toxic for common use.
PREPARATION The fresh bark, gathered just  
before the plant blooms, is chopped and 
steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Mezereum  is most appropriate for people who 
are prone to despondency , apathy , and 
detachment. They have a tendency  
toward hypochondria.
Key conditions associated with this remedy 
are suppurating skin complaints that form  
a thick crust or cause cracking. Skin symptoms 
typically affect the scalp, usually manifesting as 
eczema or psoriasis with oozing discharge that 
smells offensive and causes the hair to mat. 
Eruptions on the face are usually around the 
hairline or eyebrows. The skin is intensely itchy , 
and may feel cold and clammy . The remedy is 
also used for shingles affecting the chest.
Neuralgic pains around the teeth or face, and 
bone pains in the long bones, are also usually 
linked with Mezereum.  Symptoms include 
erratic, jerking, sharp pains, and a sensation  
of lightness or enlargement in the body .
In addition Mezereum  is prescribed for 
digestive system disorders that are anxiety-
related and involve symptoms such as diarrhea 
and a discharge from the anus.
Symptoms better  For open air; for eating.
Symptoms worse  At night; for lying down;  
for the warmth of the bed; if skin eruptions  
are suppressed by ointments; for drafts;  
for movement; for touch.
See also Severe eczema,  page 194
Digitalis purpurea
DIGITALIS
COMMON NAMES Common foxglove,  
purple foxglove.
ORIGIN Native to western Europe, and cultivated 
in India, southern and central Europe, Norway , 
Madeira, and the Azores.
BACKGROUND The 18th-century English doctor 
William Withering first established this flower’s 
importance as a heart remedy , and its active 
constituents are still used in herbal and 
conventional heart medicines.
PREPARATION The fresh leaves are picked before 
the plant blooms in its second year. The juice  
is expressed from the leaves, then mixed with 
alcohol and diluted.
Remedy profile
Digitalis  is associated primarily with the heart.  
It is prescribed for people who are prone to 
heart and circulatory disorders. The remedy is 
considered particularly appropriate if symptoms 

•141 MINOR REMEDIES
are accompanied 
by a fear of death, 
or a fear that 
moving—especially 
walking—may cause 
the heart to stop beating. There is a desire for 
bitter things and often visual disturbance. Heart 
disorders that respond well to treatment with 
Digitalis  are typically accompanied by pains in 
the region of the heart, a slow pulse, faintness, 
and nausea. The remedy is also used for liver 
problems, particularly if they occur in 
conjunction with heart symptoms.
Symptoms better  For cool air; for rest; for  
lying on the back; for an empty stomach; for 
frequent urination.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for standing up;  
for exertion; for movement; for lying on the  
left side; for sexual excess.
See also Palpitations,  page 186
    
Dioscorea villosa
DIOSCOREA
COMMON NAMES Wild yam, colic root.
ORIGIN Native to North and Central America.
BACKGROUND A traditional Aztec remedy for 
pain, wild yam was commonly used in Central 
America for colic and menstrual pain. It was 
also used in the production of the first 
contraceptive pill.
PREPARATION The fresh root is dug up after the 
plant has flowered. It is then chopped and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom this remedy is most 
appropriate are prone to irritability , stress,  
and nervousness, and want to be left alone.
Key symptoms associated with Dioscorea  are 
neuralgic and colicky pains, primarily 
affecting the gastrointestinal system. 
The pains are typically severe, 
cutting, cramping, and grinding, and 
radiate out in all directions from a central point that may shift location. They  
may affect the area of the liver, radiating 
upward to the right nipple. In women, the 
pains may occur during menstruation. In men, 
Dioscorea  is typically prescribed to treat renal 
colic associated with kidney stones, sharp  
pains radiating down the testicles and legs,  
and cold, clammy perspiration.
Symptoms better  For stretching out; for bending 
backward; for standing erect; for movement; for 
firm pressure on the affected area; for belching.
Symptoms worse  For doubling over; for lying 
down; from 2 a.m. onward; for eating; for 
drinking tea.
Drosera rotundifolia
DROSERA
COMMON NAMES Sundew, common sundew, 
round-leaved sundew, red rot,  
youthwort, moorgrass.
ORIGIN Grows in Europe, Asia, and  
North America.
BACKGROUND Sundew was taken in the 16th  
and 17th centuries for melancholia. In 1735 
the Irish Herbal  advised that it could be used  
to “eat away rotten sores.”
PREPARATION The whole,  
fresh, flowering plant is  
macerated in alcohol.Remedy profile
Drosera  is usually prescribed to treat a 
deep, violent, spasmodic cough, especially 
whooping cough. Associated symptoms  
may include restlessness, anxiety, retching, 
vomiting, cold sweats, and nosebleeds. 
There may also be a feeling that there is  
a feather or crumb in the larynx, which 
triggers coughing. The voice is often 
toneless, hoarse, and deep.
There is some indication that Drosera  
may be helpful in treating behavioral 
problems, particularly in children. It is best 
suited to children who are restless, anxious, 
peevish, and distrustful. Their emotions 
seem unbalanced, and they often have 
difficulty concentrating. Their anxiety may 
increase when they are alone, and can be 
associated with a fear of ghosts.
Drosera  may also be given for childhood 
growing pains, especially if they are 
accompanied by emotional imbalance. 
Symptoms may include stiff ankles and  
pains in the joints and bones, particularly 
affecting the hips and thighs.
Symptoms better  For open air; for movement; for 
walking; for sitting up; for pressure on the 
affected area.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; after midnight;  
for lying down; for cold foods.
See also Whooping cough,  page 250
Echinacea angustifolia
ECHINACEA
COMMON NAMES Echinacea, coneflower.
ORIGIN Native to North America, and now 
cultivated in Europe and the US.
BACKGROUND Native Americans used echinacea 
for toothache and sore throats. Long considered 
a herbal “cure-all” and thought to stimulate the 
immune system.
PREPARATION The fresh plant, including the root, 
is pulped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Echinacea  is typically prescribed for its 
antiseptic properties, to treat abscesses, boils, 
carbuncles, swollen glands, animal and insect 
bites and stings, septicemia, and diphtheria. 
The remedy is also given to treat cancer, 
especially as an analgesic in the late stages of 
the illness. T ypical physical symptoms include 
chilliness, tiredness, and weakness, with 
aching muscles, considerable weight loss, 
debility , and foul-smelling discharges.
Symptoms better  For rest; for  
lying down; after physical or  
mental exertion.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for cold air.DROSERA  
ROTUNDIFOLIA   
(Sundew)DIGITALIS  
PURPUREA   
(Common foxglove)

142 •MINOR REMEDIES
Equisetum hyemale & E. arvense
EQUISETUM
COMMON NAMES Rough horsetail, field horsetail.
ORIGIN Found mainly in Asia, particularly 
China, and in Europe and North America.
BACKGROUND This primitive genus has been  
used to heal wounds since at least the  
1st century BCE. Strongly abrasive, it was 
used between the Middle Ages and the  
18th century as a pot-scourer.
PREPARATION The fresh plant of either 
species, including the root, is  
first pulped, then steeped  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those who respond best to this remedy  
are irritable and easily tired. Equisetum  is 
used chiefly for painful irritation of the 
bladder, which is aching, full, and tender. 
There is typically a sensation of painful 
pressure on either side of the lower 
abdomen and bladder. The pain becomes 
worse at the end of urination. There may  
be a constant desire to urinate, possibly 
with dribbling of urine, or mucus in the 
urine. The remedy is also given to children 
who wet their bed during nightmares or 
other dreams.
Symptoms better  For lying on the back;  
for walking.
Symptoms worse  For being touched; for 
movement; for pressure on the painful area.
See also Bedwetting,  page 248
Erythroxylum coca
COCA
COMMON NAME Coca.
ORIGIN Native to Peru and Bolivia, but now also 
cultivated elsewhere in South America and in 
Asia, usually illegally .
BACKGROUND Early European travelers to the 
Andes noted that the indigenous Indians 
chewed coca leaves as a stimulant. Coca contains cocaine, a narcotic drug that has 
spawned a huge illegal industry.
PREPARATION The leaves are dried, powdered,  
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Coca is most appropriate for people who 
alternate between complete exhaustion and 
great mental excitement. They may be timid and 
antisocial, and have a sense of impending death 
and auditory hallucinations, or they may be 
extremely talkative and experience blissful 
visions. Their brains may feel muddled, and 
they can lose their sense of right or wrong and 
neglect their appearance. It is often used for 
symptoms associated with altitude sickness. 
Athletes and elderly people with symptoms of 
breathlessness or asthma may also be treated 
with Coca, since the classic physical symptom 
picture includes breathlessness.
Symptoms better  For rapid movement; for open 
air; after sunset; for wine.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for ascending to high 
altitudes; for physical and mental exertion.
Eupatorium perfoliatum
EUPATORIUM PER.
COMMON NAMES Boneset, agueweed, 
thoroughwort, sweating plant.
ORIGIN Native to North America.
BACKGROUND Native Americans used a boneset 
infusion for colds, fever, arthritis, and rheumatic 
pain. It became popular with European settlers 
due to its ability to stimulate the immune 
system against fever.
PREPARATION The fresh aerial parts in flower are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
When unwell, people for whom this remedy is 
best suited may moan with pain and feel that 
they are going out of their minds. They tend  
to feel anxious and restless, wishing that they 
could keep still. They may have a sensation as 
though their bones are broken.
Eupatorium per.  is usually given for 
influenza or malarial fever accompanied by 
pain in the limbs. Fever typically starts as a 
chill, then generates heat, sweating, and a 
strong thirst, accompanied by pains in the 
bones and great restlessness. Further 
symptoms that may be treated include 
vomiting of bile, and headaches that feel 
worse during the sweating phase.
Symptoms better  For conversation; after  
vomiting bile.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; after a recurring 
interval of time; for movement; for the smell or 
sight of food.Euphorbia resinifera ‘Berger’
EUPHORBIUM
COMMON NAMES Spurge, gum euphorbia.
ORIGIN Native to Morocco.
BACKGROUND In classical times spurge was used 
as a purgative, until recognition of the danger  
of poisoning from an overdose led to disuse. In 
Europe its milky , irritant sap was used to burn 
off warts until the 19th century .
PREPARATION The hardened, resinous sap is 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
A key symptom linked with Euphorbium  is 
burning pain in the bones, as if there are live 
coals in or on the bones. The limbs may feel 
weak and dislocated, with sharp, cramping 
pains and weakness in the joints.
Another classic problem treated by this 
remedy is itching, burning skin, possibly with 
warts, slow-healing ulcers, or yellow blistering. 
These symptoms may be due to erysipelas  
(a bacterial infection) on the face.
Symptoms better  For movement; for applying oil 
to the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For sitting; for touch; on 
beginning to move.
Euphrasia officinalis
EUPHRASIA
COMMON NAME Eyebright.
ORIGIN Native to Europe, but now also found in 
Asia and North America.
BACKGROUND This herb has been used to treat eye 
strain and inflammations since the Middle Ages. 
Modern herbalists use it for infections and 
allergic conditions of the eyes, middle ear, 
sinuses, and nasal passages.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh, flowering plant, 
including the root, is chopped and macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond well to Euphrasia  are 
typically taciturn, indolent, melancholic,  
and prone to daydreaming.
Euphrasia  has a classic affinity 
with the eyes. Common  
physical symptoms include 
irritation in the eyes, with cutting, burning, 
pressing pains and sticky mucus. There is 
typically heightened sensitivity to light, 
with burning, swollen eyelids and frequent 
blinking. The eyes tend to water profusely, 
a symptom that is exacerbated by open air, 
lying down, or coughing. The remedy is 
used mainly for allergies or infections 
affecting the eyes and nose, such as colds, EQUISETUM ARVENSE  
(Field horsetail)

•143 MINOR REMEDIES
hay fever, or conjunctivitis. It 
may also be prescribed if eye 
symptoms occur after an injury.
Symptoms better  For open air; for 
blinking; for wiping the eyes.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for wind; 
for sunlight; for being indoors.
See also Conjunctivitis,  page 220;   
Hay fever & allergic rhinitis,  page 224
Euspongia officinalis
SPONGIA
COMMON NAME Common sponge.
ORIGIN Traditionally gathered from 
waters of the Mediterranean, near 
Syria and Greece.
BACKGROUND It is thought that roasted 
sponge was first used as a remedy in 
the 13th century , by the alchemist 
Arnold von Villanova as a 
treatment for goiter.
PREPARATION Sponge is 
carefully cleaned of 
sand, then toasted  
in a metal drum 
before being powdered 
and triturated.
Remedy profile
Spongia  is most appropriate for 
those who have a marked fear  
of heart disease and of death, 
particularly by suffocation. 
They may feel 
uncomfortable in clothes.
There is a strong focus  
on the heart with this remedy . 
T ypical physical symptoms treated 
include palpitations and an uneasy feeling  
in the area of the heart. There may be 
congestion, with a sensation as though blood 
is rushing into the chest and face. A fear of 
suffocation and a sense of the heart being forced 
upward out of the chest can disrupt sleep after 
midnight. There is great exhaustion and the 
body feels heavy , so that even the slightest 
exertion causes complete prostration.
Spongia  is also prescribed for upper 
respiratory tract infections that tend to settle  
in the larynx, such as a dry , hollow , barking, 
croupy cough. There is typically a feeling of dryness in the mucous membranes, and 
inflammation, enlargement, and hardening of 
the glands, especially the thyroid gland. There 
may be a sensation as if there is a plug in the 
larynx, which may feel very sensitive to touch. 
Pain in the larynx typically becomes worse for 
swallowing, singing, or talking.
Symptoms better  For lying with the head low;  
for bending forward; for eating small amounts; for 
warm foods and drinks.
Symptoms worse  For dry, cold winds; for  
waking up; at midnight.
Fagopyrum esculentum
FAGOPYRUM
COMMON NAME Buckwheat.
ORIGIN Native to central and northern Asia, and 
cultivated in temperate regions, especially in the 
US and eastern Europe.
BACKGROUND This major grain crop may have 
been brought to Europe during the Crusades of 
the 11th and 12th centuries. Medicinally , the 
leaves were used for high blood pressure, 
chilblains, and frostbite.
PREPARATION The aerial parts are picked after 
flowering and before the fruits ripen, then 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Confusion and alternating states of mind are 
typical in those for whom Fagopyrum  is best 
suited. These people also tend to be depressed 
and irritable.
Fagopyrum  is generally associated with 
eczema and itching skin, possibly on the 
genitals, scalp, eyelids, and ears, or in the folds 
of the skin of infants and the elderly . The inside 
of the nose may become sore and crusted. Foul-
smelling secretions may accompany itching.
Heart complaints associated with visibly 
pulsing arteries, either with or without 
concurrent skin conditions, may also be treated 
with Fagopyrum.  Other symptoms linked to this 
remedy include a rapid, irregular pulse and a 
strong sensation of oppression in the heart area.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses; for 
pressure on the affected area; for coffee.
Symptoms worse  For sunlight; for scratching;  
for movement.Ferula assa-foetida syn. Narthex assa-foetida
ASAFOETIDA
COMMON NAMES Asafetida, devil’s dung.
ORIGIN Native to Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan.
BACKGROUND In the 7th century BCE the Charaka 
Samhita , an Ayurvedic medicine book, 
advocated this foul-smelling plant for bloating 
and flatulence, for which it is still used in India 
and the Middle East.
PREPARATION Gum resin from the living roots is 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to this remedy 
tend to be in a rather nervous, hysterical, 
hypersensitive, and hypochondriac state. 
This nervous state extends to the physical 
symptoms, which generally focus on 
digestive disorders and on nervous 
twitching. The stomach may feel as if it is 
pushing upward so that everything will 
burst into the mouth, or there may be a 
sensation as if a lump in the stomach is 
rising upward into the throat.
Symptoms better  For open air; for movement;  
for pressure on the affected area; for scratching.
Symptoms worse  At night; for rest; for sitting;  
for touch.
Fraxinus americana
FRAXINUS
COMMON NAME White ash.
ORIGIN Native to eastern North America.
BACKGROUND In Norse mythology the ash tree 
was considered sacred. In Europe its nutritious 
sap has traditionally been used as a 
gentle laxative.
PREPARATION The bark of the tree is chopped and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
A need to talk is common in those who  
respond best to this remedy , and they tend  
to be depressed, nervous, and anxious. Illness 
may be accompanied by uneasy sleep and  
frightening dreams.
Fraxinus  is chiefly used for uterine problems. 
T ypical symptoms include a uterus that is 
relaxed in tone, or possibly prolapsed, with a 
watery , non-irritating vaginal discharge and a 
heavy , painful, bearing-down sensation. The 
remedy is also given for heavy , painful 
menstruation, and for fibroids and  
other tumors.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For injury; for sprains;  
for lifting.
See also Fibroids,  page 199EUSPONGIA OFFICINALIS   
(Common sponge)EUPHRASIA 
OFFICINALIS  
(Eyebright)

144 •MINOR REMEDIES
Galipea officinalis syn. G. cusparia
ANGUSTURA
COMMON NAME Angostura.
ORIGIN Native to the Caribbean and tropical 
South America.
BACKGROUND The bitter bark of this tree was 
long used by native Americans as a tonic, and 
to stun fish and hence increase the catch. 
Brought to Europe in 1759, it was originally 
used for aromatic bitters.
PREPARATION Dried bark from the tree’s branches 
is macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Angustura  is best suited to people who are 
either timid and weak, or oversensitive, touchy , 
and “filled with bitterness.” They are often very 
restless at night, waking for no reason, and 
unable to get back to sleep. Their dreams are 
vivid, anxious, and unsettling, and they may 
crave coffee.
The remedy is typically prescribed for 
rheumatic conditions and nervous system 
disorders, especially those affecting the nerves  
in the spine or causing paralysis. Symptoms 
include tension and stiffness in the muscles and 
joints, making them feel sore and bruised. There 
may be tearing pains in the bones that lead to 
difficulty in walking. The tissues may even 
decay due to painful ulcers that penetrate the 
bone marrow and cause the bones to crumble, 
particularly the long bones of the body .
Symptoms better  For applying cold fingers or a 
cold compress to the affected area; for sitting 
up; for rest.
Symptoms worse  For exertion; for stooping;  
for sitting bent over; for touching the affected 
area; for noise.
Gelsemium sempervirens
GELSEMIUM
COMMON NAMES Carolina jasmine, yellow 
jasmine, false jasmine.
ORIGIN Native to the southern US  
and Central America, and now  
grown worldwide.
BACKGROUND Carolina jasmine came  
into regular use from the middle  
of the 19th century , chiefly as a 
treatment for nervous disorders 
such as sciatica and neuralgia.
PREPARATION The fresh bark of 
the root is finely chopped and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Gelsemium  is most suited fear 
losing control. They dislike being disturbed, especially while feverish, when they feel dull, 
drowsy , and dizzy , but want to be held. Their 
faces are flushed dark red, with a dull,  
besotted expression.
A general state of mental and physical 
paralysis, with weakness and an inability to 
perform, are key symptoms linked to this 
remedy . At times the remedy has been given 
to strengthen courage on the battlefield, and 
it is often used for phobias, exam nerves, 
stage fright, and other anticipatory terrors, 
which cause trembling, weakness, diarrhea, 
and frequent urination. In the long term, 
these symptoms may lead to more 
complicated, serious neurological disorders 
and possibly even paralysis, which the 
remedy may help.
Gelsemium  is also used to treat acute 
influenza or sore throats, with weakness, limp 
limbs, chills, fever, headaches with double 
vision, and heavy , drooping eyelids. There  
may be a lack of thirst, even during fever. In 
addition, the remedy can be given for hay  
fever if accompanied by these symptoms.
Symptoms better  For profuse urination; for 
sweating; for shaking; for alcoholic drinks.
Symptoms worse  In humid weather, especially 
during spring; for extreme emotions; for dread  
or ordeals; for surprises or shocks.
See also Phobias,  page 211 ; Influenza,  page 
224; Sore throat,  page 226 ; Exam nerves,   
page 254Gnaphalium polycephalum
GNAPHALIUM
COMMON NAMES Sweet-scented everlasting  
flower, cudweed.
ORIGIN Native to North America.
BACKGROUND This plant has been used in herbal 
medicine to treat colds, fevers, and respiratory 
and intestinal catarrh, and has been applied as 
a poultice to bruises.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh plant is macerated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy is used mainly for intense sciatic 
pains alternating with or followed by 
numbness. Lumbago with numbness and 
heaviness in the affected area may also be 
treated, as may joint pains and rheumatic 
complaints. In addition, foul-smelling diarrhea 
with colic that is worse in the morning may 
respond to the remedy , as may scanty periods 
that are at their most painful on the first day .
Symptoms better  For sitting in a chair; for flexing 
the limbs.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for 
movement; for walking; for stepping up or down; 
for lying down on the left side.
Gratiola officinalis
GRATIOLA
COMMON NAMES Hedge hyssop, herb  
of grace.
ORIGIN Found in central Europe, North America, 
and Australia.
BACKGROUND Originally esteemed medicinally 
for jaundice and other liver or spleen 
complaints, this herb is now little used due 
to its toxicity .
PREPARATION The fresh bulb is dug  
up prior to flowering and steeped  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Gratiola  is most suited to those who 
appear irritable, haughty , and 
possibly excessively proud. They 
may develop mental symptoms if 
they drink coffee regularly over a long 
period of time, as well as physical 
symptoms such as migraine, sciatica, 
and a high libido. A high sex drive, 
frequent masturbation, and 
nymphomania are primary 
conditions that may be helped by  
Gratiola , particularly in women.  
In addition, the remedy is prescribed for 
gastrointestinal problems such as cramps in the 
pit of the stomach, and pressing pain after  
GELSEMIUM SEMPERVIRENS  
(Carolina jasmine)

•145 MINOR REMEDIES
eating, as if a stone is rolling from side to side 
in the stomach. Eating may be followed by a 
strange sense of emptiness in the stomach. 
There may be green, frothy , watery diarrhea 
that is expelled with great force.
Symptoms better  For open air.
Symptoms worse  For summer; for 
eating; for drinking excessive 
amounts of water; for coffee.
Guaiacum officinale
GUAIACUM
COMMON NAME Lignum vitae.
ORIGIN Native to South 
America and the  
Caribbean Islands.
BACKGROUND In the 16th century , 
native Americans were found to be 
using lignum vitae for venereal disease and 
syphilis, and it became popular in Europe until 
discredited in the 18th century .
PREPARATION The resin obtained from the tree  
is macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Guaiacum  is most appropriate for narrow-
minded people who tend to be obstinate, 
overcritical, and inflexible. This mental rigidity 
is mirrored by a fixation of  
the joints. The remedy is most commonly  
used for great arthritic or rheumatic joint pain, 
especially in the wrists. Arthritic pain may  
feel worse for heat, and there may also be  
a sensation of swelling, tension, and tautness in 
the muscles, as if they are too short. There is  
a strong desire to yawn and stretch. In children, 
the remedy profile may include growing pains.
Symptoms better  For cold, wet weather; for cold 
compresses; for apples.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for wet weather; for 
touch; for movement; for exertion; for  
rapid growth.
Hamamelis virginiana
HAMAMELIS
COMMON NAME Virginia witch hazel.
ORIGIN Native to Canada and eastern and central 
US, and grown in Europe.
BACKGROUND Native Americans used witch hazel 
in poultices for tumors and inflammations. It is 
used as an herbal first-aid remedy for its 
astringent properties.
PREPARATION Fresh, chopped bark from the 
twigs and root is steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Hamamelis  often 
feel a lack of appreciation and respect from   
 
 
others prior to illness, which tends to make 
them become depressed and solitary . When  
ill, they are prone to feelings of restlessness  
and irritability .
The remedy’s primary use is in treating 
hemorrhoids and varicose veins. The veins  
are typically inflamed and weak. There is 
susceptibility to hemorrhaging, such as heavy 
periods in women or nosebleeds. Bleeding  
is generally slow to stop, and is usually 
accompanied by calm. Hamamelis  may  
also be used for injuries to the eye.
Symptoms better  For fresh air; for reading; for 
thinking; for talking.
Symptoms worse  For warm, damp air; for 
pressure on the affected area; for movement.
See also Varicose veins,  page 230 ; 
Hemorrhoids,  page 238
Hekla lava
HEKLA
COMMON NAME Hekla lava.
ORIGIN Volcanic ash from the immediate vicinity 
of Mt. Hekla in Iceland.
BACKGROUND Mt. Hekla last erupted in 2000. Its 
lava contains aluminum silicate, magnesium, 
calcium, and iron oxide.
PREPARATION Ash is triturated with lactose sugar 
to make the tincture.
Remedy profile
Hekla  is best suited to people who are rather 
volcanic in temperament. They usually suppress 
any anger, but after a certain point they erupt.
The remedy is typically used for bone 
disorders, such as exostosis (benign bony 
outgrowths) or osteitis (inflammation of the bone). It is considered particularly suitable for 
treating sarcoma (cancer of the connective 
tissue) and osteosarcoma (a malignant bone 
tumor), especially if they occur in the jaw , 
head, or legs. Glandular swellings, 
particularly those in the neck, 
can also be treated with Hekla , 
as can toothaches.
Symptoms better  For continued 
movement; toward 3 p.m.
Symptoms worse  For pressure 
on the affected area; for sitting; 
on beginning to move.
See also Cancer,  page 208
Hippomane mancinella
MANCINELLA
COMMON NAMES Manchineel, manzanilla,  
Beach apple.
ORIGIN Found in the West Indies.
BACKGROUND The sap of this tree, or even just 
the smoke from its wood when burning, is so 
acrid that it can cause blindness on contact 
with the eyes.
PREPARATION The fresh fruits, leaves, and bark  
of the tree are chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Mancinella  is used primarily for mental rather 
than physical symptoms. It is most appropriate 
for people who fear that they may become 
insane and lose control of their minds, due to 
the intrusion of evil thoughts or possession by 
evil spirits. Their feelings are intensified by 
watching horror movies, and their anxieties 
may become obsessive or even lead to a 
psychological breakdown. An advanced 
breakdown may cause the memory to 
deteriorate, with forgetfulness from one minute 
to the next. Mancinella  is also prescribed for 
confused feelings about sexuality that are 
bound up with the fear of being possessed by 
evil spirits, especially if these feelings occur 
during puberty or the menopause.
Physical symptoms typically associated  
with Mancinella  include skin problems such  
as dermatitis. They are generally accompanied 
by an oozing, sticky serum, which may form 
crusts or blisters, or stinging blisters on the soles 
of the feet, with acrid, sticky foot perspiration.
The sense of smell may be affected by  
strange illusions, such as phantom smells of 
gunpowder or dung. There may be a peppery , 
burning sensation in the mouth, along with a 
taste of blood and copious yellow saliva.
Symptoms better  For rubbing the affected area; 
for walking.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for damp; for touch; 
for puberty; for menopause.HAMAMELIS VIRGINIANA  
(Virginia witch hazel)

146 •MINOR REMEDIES
Humulus lupulus syn. Lupulus humulus
LUPULUS
COMMON NAME Hops.
ORIGIN Native to Europe and Asia.
BACKGROUND Hops have been cultivated in 
Europe since at least the 11th century to 
make beer. Medicinally , hops are used mainly 
as a sedative, often sewn into a bed pillow  
to aid sleep at night.
PREPARATION The fresh hops are finely 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Appropriately enough for a remedy based on 
a plant used to make beer, Lupulus  is often 
used to treat hangovers or the aftereffects of 
drinking alcohol, such as nausea, dizziness, 
and headaches. It may also be given for 
nervous twitches or delirium associated  
with drunkenness.
Muscles affected by twitching, nervous 
tremors may also be treated by Lupulus , as 
may rheumatic pains that shift from place  
to place, mainly in the shoulders, arms, and 
hands. There may be a sensation of churning 
in the stomach, accompanied by nausea and 
vomiting. Burning in the urethra when 
urinating and overexcitability are further 
possible symptoms, as is greasy , clammy , 
profuse perspiration.
Symptoms better  For open air.
Symptoms worse  For coffee; 
for alcohol.
Hydrargyrum bichloratum syn. Mercurius 
sublimatus corrosivus
MERC. CORR.
COMMON NAME Mercuric chloride.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Mercuric chloride is a powerful 
disinfectant with rapid, violent effects if 
ingested, especially on the rectum.
PREPARATION The compound is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Merc. corr .  are 
prone to anxiety and restlessness, which  
may develop into delirium and stupor  
during illness. They often feel detached or 
disconnected from others, and may stare 
blankly at people when they are talking, without comprehending what  
they are saying.
Symptoms linked to Merc. corr .  
tend to be excessive, rapid, and 
violent, often centering on the 
digestion. The remedy is used for 
colitis or dysentery with hot, foul-
smelling stools, cutting pains, and 
constant straining, even after passing a 
stool. Great straining may be needed to 
empty the bladder. Burning in the throat, 
stomach, rectum, and bladder, with great 
susceptibility to the cold, may be linked to 
throat complaints treated by Merc. corr . , such 
as swollen glands, a constant need to swallow 
despite pain, and ulcerated tonsils.
Symptoms better  For rest.
Symptoms worse  For open air; for urinating;  
for passing a stool; at night.
See also Ulcerative colitis,  page 190
Hydrargyrum biiodatum syn. Mercurius 
biiodatus
MERC. IOD. RUBER.
COMMON NAME Mercuric iodide.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This red, odorless powder has a 
faintly metallic taste. It is used as an antiseptic 
and disinfectant for the skin.
PREPARATION Mercuric iodide is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Those who respond best to Merc. iod. ruber .   
tend to be weepy , low in spirits, and irritable, 
particularly in the morning. Toward evening 
they often feel better and become more cheerful.
The classic symptom picture for this 
remedy is of an ulcerated sore throat with 
swollen glands, especially on the left side.  
The throat may be painful and dark red,  
with stiff muscles in the neck and throat.
Symptoms better  For open air; in the evening.
Symptoms worse  For sleep; in the morning.
Hydrargyrum chloratum syn. Mercurius 
dulcis
MERC. DULC.
COMMON NAMES Mercurous chloride, calomel.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared, although it 
occurs naturally in Germany , the former 
Yugoslavia, Mexico, and Texas.
BACKGROUND This compound was used 
medicinally from the 16th century as a 
cathartic, but has since fallen out of favor  
due to its toxicity .
PREPARATION Mercurous chloride is mixed  
with lactose sugar and triturated.Remedy profile
Apprehension, restlessness, and agitation are 
common in those for whom Merc. dulc.  is 
most suitable.
Key symptoms associated with the remedy 
include catarrhal inflammation in the ears and 
eustachian tubes, leading to deafness and glue 
ear. The condition is predominant in children, 
and Merc. dulc.  is particularly appropriate for 
those who appear pale and ill-nourished.
Symptoms better  For cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For acidic foods and drinks.
Hydrargyrum cyanatum syn. Mercurius 
cyanatus
MERC. CYAN.
COMMON NAME Mercurous cyanide.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This highly poisonous substance 
has no history of use in medicine, except  
in homeopathy .
PREPARATION Mercurous cyanide is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Merc. cyan.  is given most often to people  
who are talkative, highly emotional, and 
overexcited. They may have frequent spells  
of unconsciousness or fainting, depending  
on the severity of their illness.
The remedy is typically used for acute 
infectious diseases with rapidly sinking strength 
and a tendency to hemorrhage. It is strongly 
associated with throat and mouth conditions 
such as tonsillitis and diphtheria. The throat is 
typically red with a white coating, and there 
may be pain on swallowing, with inflammation 
of the uvula. The tongue, lips, and cheeks tend 
to ulcerate, and there is metallic-tasting saliva 
and offensive-smelling breath.
These symptoms are usually accompanied 
by weakness, great sensitivity to the cold, 
nausea, and cold, damp, sweaty skin.HUMULUS 
LUPULUS  
(Hop)HYDRARGYRUM CHLORATUM  
(Mercurous chloride)

•147 MINOR REMEDIES
Symptoms better  For drinking milk.
Symptoms worse  For swallowing; for speaking; 
for eating.
Hydrargyrum iodatum flavatum syn. 
Mercurius iodatus flavatus
MERC. IOD. FLAV .
COMMON NAME Mercurous iodide.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND In Western conventional 
medicine, this compound has traditionally 
been used to make an ointment that is 
applied externally for eye diseases.
PREPARATION Mercurous iodide is mixed with 
lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Merc. iod. flav.  is most appropriate for people 
who tend to alternate rapidly between 
depression and high spirits.
The classic symptom picture for Merc. iod. 
flav. is of right-sided complaints, particularly 
throat infections with swollen glands and a 
coated tongue. If pharyngitis, tonsillitis, or ear 
infections affect the right side, Merc. iod. flav.  
is strongly indicated. Common symptoms 
include a sensation as if there is a lump in the 
throat, throat inflammation, and ulcerated 
patches in the throat that exude a cheeselike 
mucus. Sharp, throbbing pains may affect the 
right ear, becoming worse on swallowing.
Symptoms better  For open air; for physical 
exertion; during the day.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
at night; for gentle movement.
Hydrargyrum sulphas syn. Mercurius 
sulphuricus
MERC. SULPH.
COMMON NAMES Mercuric sulfate,  
turpeth mineral.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This heavy , odorless, 
tasteless, lemon yellow powder has no 
medicinal uses, except in homeopathy .
PREPARATION Mercuric sulfate is mixed 
with lactose sugar and triturated.
Remedy profile
Eating tends to make people for whom 
Merc. sulph.  is best suited feel irritable.  
They may be chilly , pale, and anxious.
Key conditions associated with this remedy 
include digestive complaints and respiratory 
difficulties. Merc. sulph.  is given for breathing 
that tends to be rapid and short, with burning 
in the chest, pain in the region of the heart, and 
weakness that may feel better for sitting up.  An irritated stomach, with vomiting, burning 
in the anus, hot, copious urine, and watery , 
soft, or violently expelled stools are 
characteristic of the digestive symptoms 
treated by Merc. sulph.  In some cases, 
symptoms may be combined: for instance, 
fluid in the lungs may be accompanied by 
watery or violent diarrhea and other  
digestive symptoms.
Symptoms better  For sitting up; for profuse 
diarrhea (in the case of breathing difficulties).
Symptoms worse  For lying down; in the 
morning; at night.
Hydrargyrum sulphuratum rubrum  
syn. Cinnabar
CINNABARIS
COMMON NAMES Mercuric sulfide, sulfide  
of mercury , quicksilver.
ORIGIN Found mainly in Spain, and also in 
Peru, Italy , and California.
BACKGROUND In traditional Chinese medicine 
this mineral is used to treat sore throats, 
mouth ulcers, and palpitations. Its bright-
scarlet pigment is called vermilion.
PREPARATION Mercuric sulfide is triturated with 
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Cinnabaris  is best suited to people who are 
nervous, uneasy , sad, weak, and weary . They 
do not want to use their brains, and may 
become forgetful, often feeling that their 
heads are “full” from mental use. At night  
a stream of constantly changing thoughts  
runs through their heads. They are usually 
sensitive to touch and to the slightest noise, 
preferring to be left alone.  This remedy has a classic affinity with genital 
and rectal ulceration and warts, and its profile 
is similar to that of Merc. sol.  (see page 85) . 
Key symptoms include fiery red ulcers on the 
skin and the mucous membranes, warts that 
bleed easily , pimples, pustules, and red skin 
eruptions that tend to itch violently .
The head is a focus for other symptoms 
that may be helped by the remedy . These 
include headaches with congestion; red, 
inflamed eyes; catarrh in the nose and throat; 
and a dry , sore throat. Sleep patterns may be 
disrupted, with noticeable restlessness and 
sleeplessness, although there is often a 
marked lack of tiredness.
Cinnabaris  may also be used to treat women 
who experience very painful menstruation 
and pregnancy , or great pains during labor.
Symptoms better  For open air; for sunshine; 
after dinner.
Symptoms worse  For damp; for touch;  
for evening; at night; for light;  
before menstruation.
Hydrastis canadensis
HYDRASTIS
COMMON NAMES Goldenseal, orangeroot, 
yellow puccoon.
ORIGIN Native to North America.
BACKGROUND Native Americans used golden-
seal’s root for its intense yellow dye, and 
medicinally for cancer, fevers, indigestion, 
and heart or liver disorders. It was introduced 
to Europe in 1760.
PREPARATION The dried underground parts of 
the plant are steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who benefit from Hydrastis  tend to  
be weary , exhausted, thin, and elderly , often 
with degenerative conditions.
The classic symptom picture for this 
remedy is of problems of the mucous 
membranes. It is associated with catarrh, 
sinusitis, a sore throat, and an abnormal 
taste in the mouth. There may be copious, 
thick, yellowish, stringy mucus affecting the 
mucous membranes of the respiratory 
system. The remedy is also used for 
stomach problems, possibly 
occurring in conjunction with 
the classic problems of the 
mucous membranes. 
Characteristic symptoms 
include poor digestion, a 
sensation of emptiness in the 
stomach that remains even after 
eating, and constipation with no urge 
to pass stools.  HYDRARGYRUM 
SULPHURATUM RUBRUM  
(Mercuric sulfide)

148 •
The remedy is  
often used for  
people susceptible  
to cancerous and  
precancerous states, 
notably those affecting 
the liver, colon, or 
breast. Hydrastis  has 
an especially strong 
affinity with liver 
cancer, and may be 
taken to reduce the 
need for narcotics 
and analgesics.
Symptoms better  
For warmth; for 
covering up 
warmly; for dry 
weather; for rest; 
for pressure on 
the affected area.
Symptoms worse  
At night; for open 
air; for bathing; 
during pregnancy;  
for the touch of 
clothing; for alcohol and drug abuse.
See also Catarrh,  page 226
Hypericum perforatum
HYPERICUM
COMMON NAME St. John’s-wort.
ORIGIN Native to Europe and Asia, but  
now found in temperate areas worldwide.
BACKGROUND Renowned medicinally since 
classical times, St. John’s-wort was long 
thought to have magical importance too.  
An extract of it is given for depression.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh plant is finely 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Hypericum  is prescribed for people who are 
depressed, frightened, or shocked following an injury or accident. They may be nervous, 
overexcited, constantly drowsy , talk while 
asleep, and forgetful when speaking. These 
people may also experience a constant 
sensation of elevation or falling.
Key physical symptoms associated with this 
remedy are injuries or wounds that feel more 
painful than they appear, with extremely sharp 
pains, perhaps in nerve-rich areas such as the 
fingertips or the base of the spine. The remedy 
may be used to relieve pain following 
operations, accidents, puncture wounds,  
and animal bites, and is also given to help 
prevent tetanus. Nervous pains in phantom 
limbs after amputation, and toothaches or 
discomfort after dental treatment, may also be 
helped by the remedy .
Symptoms better  For lying quietly; for lying 
face down; for bending the head backward;  
for rubbing the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather;  
for injury; for jarring; for shock.
Iridium metallicum
IRIDIUM MET.
COMMON NAME Iridium.
ORIGIN Obtained from osmiridium, an alloy of 
iridium, osmium, and platinum.
BACKGROUND This metal is named after the 
Greek goddess of the rainbow, Iris, due to its 
colorful salts. It is used in fountain-pen nibs 
and hypodermic needles.
PREPARATION Iridium is triturated with  
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Those who respond most effectively to 
Iridium met.  are generally well presented 
and confident. If not successful in their 
plans or projects, or if they become ill and 
exhausted, they may experience confusion, 
with poor concentration and the feeling 
that their minds are empty.
Classic physical symptoms linked to 
Iridium met.  include exhaustion and  
anemia following a bout of illness, and 
muscle pain and stiffness with tender, 
swollen joints. There may be nervous, 
pinching pains in the wrists, fingers, and 
limbs. In the hip joints there may be 
scraping, smarting pains and a crawling 
sensation; sciatic nerve pain may radiate 
down the legs. Neuralgic pains, perhaps in 
the back of the head, may be treated with 
Iridium met. , as may lameness or partial 
paralysis, especially in the elderly . The remedy 
is also used to help prevent suppurating 
abscesses in the armpits.
Symptoms better  For cold; for being indoors; for pressure on the affected area; for continued 
movement.
Symptoms worse  For talking; on the left  
side of the body.
Iris versicolor
IRIS
COMMON NAMES Blue flag, snake lily .
ORIGIN Native to North America, and now  
also grown widely in Europe.
BACKGROUND Native Americans used blue flag 
to treat stomach complaints, wounds and 
sores, colds, and earaches, and as a diuretic. 
Modern herbalists use the plant in 
detoxification treatments.
PREPARATION The fresh root, dug up and 
chopped in summer, is steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
The mood of people who respond best to  
Iris is generally low. They often feel restless 
and discouraged.
Key symptoms related to the remedy are 
headaches and migraines accompanied by 
digestive disorders such as nausea, severe 
diarrhea, or cholera. Warning signals that 
precede a migraine include great exhaustion 
and blurring or loss of vision. Migraines are 
typically right-sided but may alternate from 
side to side. They usually center in the temple 
or around the eyes, and involve throbbing 
pain, severe nausea, vomiting, and profuse 
salivation. The head pain is typically 
aggravated by vomiting and is typically weekly .
Symptoms better  For gentle movement.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; at night;  
for mental exhaustion.
Juniperus communis
JUNIPER
COMMON NAME Juniper.
ORIGIN Found in Europe and North America, 
and from southwest Asia to the Himalayas.
BACKGROUND Juniper has been used since 
classical times, both medicinally and in 
cooking. Traditionally , sprigs were flung into 
fires to ward off evil spirits, and burned to 
protect against the plague. The berries are 
used to flavor gin.
PREPARATION Alcohol is added to the finely 
chopped, fresh, ripe berries.
Remedy profile
Classically this remedy has a reputation for 
increasing urine production, and is used to 
treat water retention, possibly with advanced 
kidney disease. The urine may contain blood 
and have a strange scent of violets, and there HYDRASTIS 
CANADENSIS  
(Goldenseal)MINOR REMEDIES

•149 MINOR REMEDIES
may be a feeling of heaviness in the region of 
the kidneys. Juniper  is also used separately as 
a stimulant for the uterine muscles and to 
ease menstrual pain. It is usually given as a 
tincture rather than in tablet form.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  None known.
Juniperus sabina
SABINA
COMMON NAME Savin.
ORIGIN Grows in temperate regions of the 
Northern Hemisphere.
BACKGROUND Savin was used internally in 19th-
century Europe to induce abortions, although 
generally it has been little used in herbal 
medicine due to its high toxicity .
PREPARATION The fresh, young branch tops  
and leaves are chopped before being macerated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy is best suited to people who are 
dejected and hypochondriac. They may be 
irritable and find that even music makes them 
nervous. They often dislike being talked to, 
especially when walking in the open air. They 
may sob or weep and have weak memories.
Sabina  is strongly associated with the 
reproductive organs, and is commonly used  
for problems such as genital warts or itching, 
burning external genitalia. In men it is also 
prescribed for phimosis (constriction of the 
foreskin), swelling of the upper penis,  
and gonorrhea.
The remedy may be given to women for 
uterine problems featuring pale-red, clotting 
hemorrhages that become worse for the  
slightest movement and better for walking.  
The uterus may seem to quiver, as if there is  
a fetus moving inside it. Further symptoms 
include itchy nipples with a voluptuous, 
crawling sensation, sharp pains shooting  
up the vagina, and violent hot flashes and 
pulsations in the body . Menstrual flow is often 
profuse and premature, with pains similar to those felt during labor. Sabina  is a classic 
remedy in pregnancy for those who are prone to 
miscarriages, especially during the third month 
of pregnancy . It is also prescribed following 
labor, if the placenta has been retained and  
there is intense pain.
A craving for acidic foods and drinks, 
especially lemonade, may be apparent, and 
everything, but especially coffee and milk, may 
taste bitter. There may be violent hot flashes, 
pulsations in the body , and an urge  
to throw open a window .
Symptoms better  For cold; for open air; for 
breathing out.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for warm air; for the 
heat of the bed; for the slightest movement; for 
foggy weather; at night; during pregnancy and  
the menopause; for music; for touch.
See also Infertility,  page 203
Kalium arsenicosum
KALI. ARS.
COMMON NAMES Potassium arsenate,  
Fowler’s solution.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND The form of potassium arsenate 
used is Fowler’s solution, which consists of 
tincture of lavender, potassium carbonate, 
arsenous acid, and pure water.
PREPARATION The compound is triturated  
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Kali. ars.  is most suitable for people who are 
very anxious, especially about their health, and 
is similar in profile to Arsen. alb.  (see page 68) . 
Those affected may experience great mental  
and physical restlessness, with nervousness, 
depression, anemia, and hypersensitivity to 
touch and noise. They have a tendency to be 
either quarrelsome and excitable, or withdrawn, 
timid, and indifferent.
Key physical symptoms associated with  
this remedy are chronic or malignant skin 
problems. The skin typically burns and itches, 
becoming worse on undressing and  
for the cold; cracks may develop in the  
bends of the knees and arms. This is usually 
symptomatic of eczema, psoriasis, acne, or 
ulcers. The remedy may be used to ease skin 
cancer, and for varicose veins on the legs that 
have become ulcerous.
In addition, the remedy may be given for 
asthma with rapid, anxious breathing, which 
may become worse after midnight.
Symptoms better  For rainy days.
Symptoms worse  For cold feet; for noise; for 
touch; between 1 a.m. and 3 a.m.
See also Mild acne,  page 240Kalium bromatum
KALI. BROM.
COMMON NAME Potassium bromide.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Potassium bromide is used in 
photography to make gelatin papers and plates, 
and was used medicinally in the past as a 
sedative and anti-epileptic.
PREPARATION Solid potassium bromide is 
triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Poor memory , sadness, and loss of mental 
capabilities are often noted in those for whom 
Kali. brom.  is most appropriate. The remedy has 
an affinity with the nervous system, and may be 
prescribed following a stroke, epilepsy , or other 
seizures. Great physical restlessness, with 
characteristic traits such as frequent wringing of 
the hands or fidgeting of the feet, is a typical 
accompanying symptom, as is numbness in the 
skin and the mucous membranes, especially 
those of the throat.
At its most extreme, the state of mind 
associated with this remedy can develop into 
depressive delusions with a sense of being 
pursued for imagined wrongdoings. Fear of 
insanity and feelings of suspicion and rage may 
occur, developing in extreme cases to psychosis, 
mania, paranoia, autism, and retardation, which 
Kali. brom.  may treat. It may also ease intense 
sexual feelings that progress to sexual addiction.
In addition to its association with nervous 
symptoms, Kali. brom.  is used for skin 
symptoms such as acne (especially on the 
forehead), psoriasis, rosacea, pustules, cysts, 
eczema on the legs, cold, numb skin, and crops 
of small boils. The skin tends to be blue and 
mottled in appearance, and may scar following 
skin eruptions.
The remedy may also be used to treat female 
reproductive organs that develop ovarian cysts, 
tumors, or fibroids, and for symptoms triggered 
during menstrual periods, 
such as epilepsy . In 
men, Kali. brom.  may  
be given for excessive 
sexual appetite  
or impotence.
Symptoms better  For 
being occupied, both 
mentally and physically.
Symptoms worse  For 
sexual excess; for 
mental overexertion; 
during puberty  
or pregnancy.
See also Rosacea,   
page 193JUNIPERUS 
COMMUNIS  
(Juniper)
KALIUM BROMATUM  
(Potassium bromide)

150 •MINOR REMEDIES
Kalium chloratum
KALI. MUR.
COMMON NAME Potassium chloride.
ORIGIN Obtained from the mineral sylvine, 
which is found mainly in North America  
and Germany .
BACKGROUND Dr. Schüssler introduced this 
compound to homeopathy , using it for one  
of his tissue salts  (see page 90) .
PREPARATION Potassium chloride is triturated 
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Kali. mur .  tend  
to be optimistic and hard-working. They 
alternate between cheerfulness and sadness, 
being sensitive to sadness in others and in 
themselves, which may make them seem  
self-pitying.
Key symptoms treated by this remedy 
include chronic catarrh and congestion in  
the nose. It is particularly appropriate if 
symptoms affect the middle ear, causing 
earaches, pain behind the ears, snapping 
noises in the ears, blockage of the eustachian 
tube, and possibly deafness. The nasal 
congestion is due to profuse, whitish catarrh, 
and is characteristically accompanied  
by nosebleeds.
Kali. mur .  is also an important remedy for 
tonsillitis or swollen throat glands, for chronic 
sore throats with catarrhal crusts in the 
throat, and for cancer. Inflammation in the 
membranes and joints may also respond to 
the remedy .
Symptoms better  For rubbing the affected 
area; for letting the hair down.
Symptoms worse  For open air; for fats and rich 
foods; for cold drinks.
See also Cancer,  page 208 ; Blockage of the 
eustachian tube,  page 222 ; Catarrh,  page 226Kalium iodatum
KALI. IOD.
COMMON NAME Potassium iodide.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Potassium iodide is added 
regularly to table salt and animal feeds to 
protect against iodine deficiency .
PREPARATION Potassium iodide is triturated 
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Those for whom Kali. iod.  is best suited have 
strong tempers, and know that they can be 
cruel and difficult for others to cope with, 
especially their families.
Classic symptoms indicating the Kali. iod.  
remedy include chronic catarrh, recurring 
sinusitis, swellings, abscesses, or atrophy of 
the glands. Symptoms are characteristically 
long-standing, and tend to be accompanied 
by great weakness, sensitivity , and soreness 
that is difficult to pinpoint on the body . There  
is frequently water retention and swelling, 
and a desire to move around in the open air.
Kali. iod.  is often prescribed for the 
treatment of discharges that are copious  
and watery, possibly with chronic allergic 
rhinitis and pain in the sinuses. It is also 
prescribed for thick, chronic catarrh, 
accompanied by an unpleasant smell  
and susceptibility to nosebleeds.
Symptoms better  For cold air; for open air;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for warmth from 
clothes or a hot room; at night; for rest; for 
pressure or touch.
Kalium nitricum
KALI. NIT.
COMMON NAMES Potassium nitrate, niter, 
saltpeter.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND Potassium nitrate is used 
industrially in the preparation of glass, 
fertilizers, and gunpowder, and as a meat 
preservative or curing salt.
PREPARATION The compound is dissolved 
or triturated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those for whom Kali nit.  is most 
effective prefer to keep themselves 
busy , becoming weary and sad if 
they are alone or unoccupied. 
They like to go out and frequently 
have dreams about going on trips. 
Usually sensitive and dutiful, they become 
increasingly anxious and melancholic when ill, and may feel physically and mentally 
numb, as if they are made of wood.
Sharp pains and numbness are typically 
associated with Kali. nit. , in conjunction with 
respiratory problems. The remedy is used for 
conditions such as asthma, croup, and 
bronchitis. Further symptoms may include 
faintness, nausea, an inability to drink due  
to breathing difficulties, and a sensation of 
coldness around the area of the heart. There 
may be labored breathing caused by tightness 
in the larynx, the throat may be hoarse and 
rough, and the nose may develop polyps, 
chronic irritation, catarrh, and sinusitis.
Symptoms better  For gentle movement; for 
drinking sips of water.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for 
getting cold; for walking; for veal; for wine  
or beer.
Kalium sulphuricum
KALI. SULPH.
COMMON NAMES Potassium sulfate, sulfate  
of potash, Vesuvian salt, glaserite.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This compound is used as an 
ingredient in fertilizers and in the manufacture 
of glass, and was chosen by Dr. Schüssler to 
be one of his “biochemic” tissue salts   
(see page 90) .
PREPARATION Potassium sulfate is triturated with 
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Kali. sulph.  is most appropriate for people who 
tend to be conservative and anxious to do 
things right, down to the last detail. They are 
often hurried, anxious, restless, easily startled, 
and irritable. Dutiful in loving relationships, 
they may be self-sacrificial because of the 
connection this gives them with others.
The remedy’s classic affinities are with  
the skin and the respiratory system. It is 
commonly prescribed for peeling skin 
conditions such as eczema and psoriasis,  
and may also be appropriate for ringworm, 
polyps, oily skin problems, and skin cancer. 
The skin is characteristically chapped, scaly ,  
or peeling, and there may be sore areas with 
thin, yellow, watery discharges.
Chronic respiratory problems are a further 
key affinity of Kali. sulph.  It is used for 
chronic catarrh, or mucus in the nose, larynx, 
bronchi, or ears, and for asthma. The nose  
is typically highly congested, with rattling 
mucus in the lungs and loss of the sense  
of smell. There may be smelly , long-standing 
discharges in the ears, with frequent 
inflammation and glue ear.KALIUM 
CHLORATUM  
(Sylvine)

•151 MINOR REMEDIES
Symptoms better  For open air; for cold air;  
for walking; for fasting.
Symptoms worse  For warm air; for warm,  
stuffy rooms; in the evening; for noise; for 
sympathy; for eggs.
Kalmia latifolia
KALMIA
COMMON NAMES Mountain laurel, calico bush,  
ivy bush, lambkill.
ORIGIN Native to eastern North America.
BACKGROUND This plant is notoriously 
poisonous: grazing on the leaves can kill cattle 
and sheep and cause the meat from the animals 
to become too toxic to eat.
PREPARATION The fresh leaves of the plant in 
flower are chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Kalmia  is most suitable feel 
fine when lying down, but become dizzy and 
disoriented on trying to move.
The remedy is usually given for severe, sharp 
neuralgic pains in the muscles and joints, and 
for general muscle pain. The pains are sharp 
and darting, and generally radiate downward. 
They are frequently accompanied by great 
weakness, stiffness, numbness, trembling, and  
a tingling sensation. Heart disease, especially if 
it develops after a history of neuralgic pain and 
stiffness, may also be treated with Kalmia .
Symptoms better  For eating; for remaining still.
Symptoms worse  For becoming cold; for 
movement; from sunrise to sunset.
Kreosotum
KREOSOTUM
COMMON NAME Creosote.
ORIGIN Distilled from beechwood tar.
BACKGROUND Creosote has long been used as  
a wood preservative, and its name derives  
from the Greek kreas, or “flesh,” and soter,  
or “preserver.” A Moravian chemist, 
Reichenbach, introduced it to medicine in the 
19th century , but it fell out of favor with all 
except homeopaths.
PREPARATION Creosote is dissolved in alcohol, 
diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
A temperamental state is typical of people who 
respond best to Kreosotum . They may also be 
forgetful, peevish, sensitive to music, and 
restless at night. A tendency to dwell on the 
past is characteristic, as are dreams of sexual 
intercourse and a fear of being raped.
The classic symptom picture associated 
with Kreosotum  is of mucous membranes that become inflamed, suppurate, and then break 
down and bleed, particularly in the vagina, the 
cervix, and the uterus. The remedy is given for 
offensive-smelling discharges from the mucous 
membranes that burn the skin and cause 
itching and swelling, and it may help when 
urine burns the skin on contact. It may be 
prescribed for particular problems before and 
after menstruation, such as bleeding between 
cycles and heavy , 
offensive-smelling 
menstrual flow that 
burns the skin on  
contact. Candidiasis  
may also respond to  
the remedy , as may 
enuresis (bed-wetting).
Symptoms better  For 
warmth; after sleep; for 
movement; for pressure 
on the affected area; 
for hot foods.
Symptoms worse  For 
cold; for bathing in cold 
water; for rest;  
during pregnancy.
See also Candidiasis,  page 200
Lac vaccinum defloratum
LAC DEFL.
COMMON NAME Skimmed cow’s milk.
ORIGIN Skimmed cow’s milk.
BACKGROUND Milk has had a checkered history 
of favor. It has been lauded as being full of 
healthy vitamins and minerals, yet is also linked 
to catarrhal conditions, tuberculosis, and 
Crohn’s disease.
PREPARATION The milk is dissolved in purified 
water, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Lac defl.  is most effective for people who are 
claustrophobic, chilly , listless, and forgetful. 
They often have either an aversion to milk,  
or a tendency to drink large amounts, but  
show signs of lactose intolerance, which  
affects their nutrition and tends to make  
them thin or obese.
Key symptoms associated with Lac defl.  
are weakness and anemia after chronic 
disease. Diabetes, water retention related to 
heart disease, and chronic liver disease may 
respond to the remedy, and it may also help 
headaches, particularly those associated 
with menstruation.
Symptoms better  For rest; for profuse urine flow.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for the slightest  
draft; during menstruation and pregnancy;  
for milk.Lachnanthes tinctoria
LACHNANTHES
COMMON NAMES Red root, spirit weed.
ORIGIN Native to eastern North America.
BACKGROUND A red dye is derived from the 
plant’s root, hence one of its common names. 
When eaten, the root causes cerebral 
stimulation or narcosis.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh, flowering plant, 
with the root, is steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Lachnanthes  is most appropriate for those who 
are prone to hilarious, overexcited, talkative 
behavior followed by stupid, irritable moods. 
They are restless both night and day , and sleepy , 
although they often have difficulty falling asleep 
and may experience distressing dreams.
The main focus of the remedy rests on the 
circulation, especially in relation to the head 
and chest. There is typically a sensation of heat 
bubbling and boiling up from the heart and 
chest to the head. Right-sided headaches 
accompanied by great chilliness may also be 
treated with this remedy , as may tuberculosis.
Symptoms better  For being in bed; for  
being warmed.
Symptoms worse  On the right side; for noise;  
on waking during the night.
Lathyrus sativus
LATHYRUS
COMMON NAME Chickpea.
ORIGIN Found in the Mediterranean area, Africa, 
and central Asia.
BACKGROUND These edible, pealike seeds have 
long been used in cooking, although there is 
little tradition of medicinal use.
PREPARATION The dried, green seed pods are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy focuses predominantly on the 
spine and lower limbs. Characteristic symptoms 
treated include pain in the lower back, urinary 
incontinence, tremors, and total loss of sexual 
function. Sharpened reflexes are further 
possible symptoms, as are burning heat in the 
legs and icy cold feet. Lathyrus  has also been 
used for weakness and heaviness in the 
aftermath of influenza and other viral illnesses, 
and for multiple sclerosis. Symptoms may 
worsen rapidly following exposure to cold, 
damp night air.
Symptoms better  For undressing.
Symptoms worse  For damp, cold weather at 
night; for touch.
See also Multiple sclerosis,  page 179KREOSOTUM  (Creosote)

152 •MINOR REMEDIES
Latrodectus mactans
LATRODECTUS MAC.
COMMON NAME Black widow spider.
ORIGIN Found throughout North  
America, mainly in the southern US.
BACKGROUND The name of this highly 
poisonous spider 
comes from the 
female’s habit of 
eating the male 
after mating.
PREPARATION The live 
spider is steeped in 
alcohol, diluted,  
and succussed.
Remedy profile
Latrodectus mac.  is best suited to people  
who are tense and easily fatigued. They are 
often chilly but prone to hot flashes, and  
may dream of flying.
The remedy is typically prescribed for heart 
problems, particularly angina, with cramping, 
unbearable pain in the heart area. The pain is 
violent, sharp, numbing, and radiates to the 
arms or shoulders on both sides of the body , 
although it is worse on the left side. There may 
also be extreme restlessness that is particularly 
associated with an acute attack of angina.
Symptoms better  For sitting quietly.
Symptoms worse  For damp weather; before 
thunderstorms; for changes in the weather;  
for the slightest movement; for light.
See also Angina,  page 185
Ledum palustre
LEDUM
COMMON NAMES Marsh tea, wild rosemary .
ORIGIN Found in the Northern Hemisphere, 
especially Canada, the US, Scandinavia,  
and Ireland.
BACKGROUND Marsh tea has traditionally been 
used in Scandinavia to eliminate lice. After 
the infamous tea tax of 1773, it was used 
briefly in the US as a tea substitute.
PREPARATION As the plant comes into flower, 
the tips of the leafy shoots are collected, 
dried, and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those who respond best to Ledum  have a 
tendency to be angry , dissatisfied, anxious, 
antisocial, or even demented when ill.
Ledum  is best known as a first-aid remedy 
for cuts, grazes, puncture wounds, insect 
stings, and black eyes and other eye injuries. 
It is used to prevent infection in open 
wounds, especially in severe wounds with bruising, puffy , purplish skin, and stinging 
pains. It may help treat a slow-healing black 
eye. Ledum  is also used for bleeding into the 
eye chamber after an iridectomy (removal of 
part of the iris). Other symptoms treated with 
Ledum  include rheumatic pains that arise in 
the feet and move upward, and stiff, painful 
joints that feel hot inside despite being cold 
to the touch. The pain may be relieved 
by cold compresses.
Symptoms better  For cold compresses.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; at night;  
for touch.
See also Osteoarthritis,  page 196
Lithium carbonicum
LITHIUM CARB.
COMMON NAME Lithium carbonate.
ORIGIN Occurs naturally in some mineral 
waters in Europe and the US, but is prepared 
chemically for homeopathic use.
BACKGROUND This compound is used 
conventional medicine as a treatment for 
manic depression and hypomania.
PREPARATION Lithium carbonate is triturated 
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
People for whom this remedy is best suited 
are prone to anxious, excitable, and  
confused behavior.
The classic symptom picture for Lithium 
carb. is of hip pain, gout, distorted joints, and 
arthritic conditions, possibly with associated 
heart problems. The limbs may feel stiff, as if 
they have been beaten, and the bones, joints, 
and muscles are sore. The joints, particularly 
the small joints, tend to be swollen, 
tender, and red.
Symptoms better  For movement; for 
urinating; for eating.
Symptoms worse  At night; during and after 
menstruation; if menstruation ceases.
Lobaria pulmonaria
STICTA
COMMON NAME Tree lungwort.
ORIGIN Found throughout Europe.
BACKGROUND This lichen has been used in 
Europe for thousands of years to treat 
conditions such as chronic respiratory 
catarrh, bronchitis, and coughs.
PREPARATION The whole, dried lichen is 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Sticta  is most effective for lively people 
who tend to be loquacious, and who may feel as if they are floating on air. They may 
experience sleeplessness or confusion. Sticta   
is most appropriate for respiratory problems 
associated with hay fever or other allergic 
reactions, influenza, or bronchitis. There may 
be repeated sneezing, which tends to become 
worse at night, then dries suddenly . Sticta  
may also be used for pneumonia, and for 
chronic catarrh that is difficult to expel and 
causes stuffiness, a dull, heavy feeling in the 
head, and a dry , tickly throat.
Symptoms better  For open air; for expelling 
catarrh or mucus.
Symptoms worse  At night; for changes in 
temperature; for lying down; for movement.
See also Pneumonia,  page 183
Lobelia inflata
LOBELIA
COMMON NAMES Indian tobacco, puke weed.
ORIGIN Found in North America, especially  
the eastern and central US.
BACKGROUND This plant was used by native 
Americans as a tobacco substitute, and to 
induce vomiting or expectoration.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh plant in flower, 
including the seeds and roots, is finely 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy is most appropriate for people 
who have an overexaggerated anxiety about 
their health, particularly those who fear 
death from a disease of the heart 
or lungs. It is commonly 
prescribed for breathlessness 
and asthma accompanied by 
great anxiety. Characteristic 
symptoms include a rattling sound in 
the chest, despite the presence of 
little or no mucus, and a feeling of 
oppression and constriction in 
the chest. Further symptoms 
may include excessive 
salivation, retching, hiccuping, 
a sensation as if there is a lump in 
the throat, nausea, and a sinking 
feeling in the stomach. Nausea 
with giddiness, and vomiting with 
profuse perspiration, may also be 
helped by this remedy.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for rapid 
movement; for small amounts of food.
Symptoms worse  After sleep; for the 
least movement; for bathing in cold water; 
for smoking tobacco; for beer.LATRODECTUS  
MACTANS   
(Black widow spider)
LOBELIA INFLATA  
(Indian tobacco)

•153 MINOR REMEDIES
Lycopus virginicus
LYCOPUS
COMMON NAMES Bugleweed,  
Virginian horehound.
ORIGIN Found in eastern North America.
BACKGROUND Bugleweed has been used in 
herbal medicine for various ailments, such as 
hyperthyroidism, tuberculosis, coughs, and 
heavy menstruation.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh, finely chopped 
plant in flower, including the root, is 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Lycopus  tend to 
be irritable when ill unless spoken to very 
softly . Their minds often wander from one 
thing to another, and they may experience 
increased mental and physical activity in  
the evening.
Lycopus  is associated chiefly with the heart, 
and is used to treat a weak heart and erratic 
pulse or heart disease. Additional symptoms 
may include a tendency to hemorrhage, and 
overactivity of the thyroid gland, particularly 
during menopause. Respiratory complaints 
may develop in conjunction with the heart 
problems. These include violent coughing in 
the evening or at night during sleep, with 
sweet-tasting mucus that recurs in cold 
weather, especially following exposure to  
cold winds. In addition, there may be an 
increase in appetite.
Symptoms better  For warm surroundings; for 
lying in bed.
Symptoms worse  For cold winds; toward 
sunset; in the morning; in the evening; for 
movement; for exercise; for walking; for 
climbing stairs.
Lyssin hydrophobinum
LYSSIN
COMMON NAME Rabies.
ORIGIN Saliva from a rabid dog.
BACKGROUND Rabies is an acute viral 
infection that affects both wild and 
domestic animals and, more rarely , 
humans. Transmitted by saliva, it is 
almost always fatal in humans.
PREPARATION The saliva is rendered 
sterile, then dissolved in purified  
water, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Lyssin  is most appropriate for people 
who tend to be mentally excited and 
hyperactive, and have extreme sensitivity 
to stimuli such as light, noise, and odors. They may be affected by phobias  
and compulsive disorders associated with 
ritualistic behavior patterns and violence. 
There may be a personal or parental history 
of rabies vaccination in those who suit Lyssin .
Physical symptoms generally affect the 
nervous system, throat, and sexual organs. 
T ypically , the sight or sound of running water 
may cause fear, irritability , and a desire to 
pass stools or urinate, possibly involuntarily . 
On trying to swallow, there is a choking 
sensation, with profuse saliva that is spat out. 
In addition, the sight of glistening objects 
may cause distress.
Further conditions that may be associated 
with Lyssin  include excessive sexual energy and 
pain during sexual intercourse due to a sensitive 
vagina. There may also be uterine prolapse.
Symptoms better  For gentle rubbing; for  
steam baths.
Symptoms worse  For the heat of the sun; for 
the sound or sight of running water; for 
emotional stress; for bad news.
Magnesium carbonicum
MAG. CARB.
COMMON NAME Magnesium carbonate.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This compound is widely used in 
industry , especially in the making of bricks, 
paper, plastics, and paints. It is used medicinally 
as an antacid.
PREPARATION Magnesium carbonate is triturated 
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Mag. carb.  is best suited to long-suffering people 
who feel worn down and who crave quiet calm, being highly sensitive to noise or touch. They 
are peacemakers who cannot bear disharmony , 
although when pushed their temper may erupt, 
especially in the case of children.
A key symptom associated with Mag. carb.   
is acidity in the digestive system with sour-
smelling stools and perspiration, and poor 
digestion of milk. The remedy may be used  
for diarrhea or constipation with abnormal, 
undigested, discolored, fatty stools. It may  
also be prescribed for exhaustion or chronic 
fatigue syndrome with swollen glands, lax 
muscles, and susceptibility to hernias.
Symptoms better  For open air; for warm air;  
for movement; after passing stools.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for changes in the 
weather; at night; for rest; during pregnancy;  
for warm foods.
Magnesium chloratum
MAG. MUR.
COMMON NAME Magnesium chloride.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND The bitter taste of this compound 
can be detected in many mineral waters and in 
sea water. It is used in wall plaster and as a fire-
proofing agent for wood.
PREPARATION Magnesium chloride is triturated 
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Mag. mur .  is most suitable for people who feel 
deep distress on witnessing arguments and 
crave peace and harmony . Reserved, sad, and 
self pitying, they often show a long-suffering 
face to the world. Nervous oversensitivity is 
typical, with restlessness in bed: they find it 
hard to sleep well, waking unrefreshed and 
needing a long time to recover each morning. 
The liver, nerves, uterus, and rectum are often 
greatly affected. Conditions treated are usually 
chronic, involving great weakness, swollen 
glands, and a susceptibility to colds. Chronic 
fatigue syndrome, for example, may be helped 
by the remedy . Digestive complaints such 
nausea, indigestion, and constipation are all 
strongly associated with the remedy if they 
are accompanied by the characteristic  
nervous state of mind. Children who are 
prone to digestive problems and whose 
parents regularly argue, for instance, may 
benefit from Mag. mur .
Symptoms better  For cool, open air; for firm 
pressure on the affected area; for gentle 
movement.
Symptoms worse  At night; for noise; for touch; 
for lying on the right side of the body;  
for swimming in the sea; for eating, especially 
salt; for milk.MAGNESIUM CARBONICUM  
(Magnesium carbonate)

154 •MINOR REMEDIES
Magnesium sulphuricum
MAG. SULPH.
COMMON NAMES Magnesium sulfate,  
epsom salts.
ORIGIN Occurs naturally in some mineral 
waters, but is chemically prepared for use  
in homeopathy .
BACKGROUND Magnesium sulfate is found in 
many spa waters, such as those in Epsom,  
England, which were often drunk for their mild 
laxative effect.
PREPARATION Magnesium sulfate is triturated  
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Mag. sulph.  is best suited to those who fly into 
rages and overreact, yet also have the typical 
Magnesium  desire for peace. They tend to be 
restless and uneasy , fearing evil or a terrible 
event. Often concerned about relationships, 
they are prone to jealousy .
The remedy is usually prescribed for urinary 
disorders, possibly with digestive, skin, or 
menstrual problems and awkward limb 
movements. The urinary disorders are 
characterized by an intermittent stream on 
urinating, and burning pain after urinating.
Mag. sulph.  may also be used to treat 
exhaustion or chronic fatigue, dry skin, and 
nausea. Sleep may occur in the early evening, 
followed by insomnia at night. It may be restless 
as a result of anxious, disagreeable dreams.
Symptoms better  For rubbing the affected area; 
for walking.
Symptoms worse  In the morning; on waking.
Malandrinum
MALANDRINUM
COMMON NAME Horse grease.
ORIGIN Specimen of the oily secretion taken  
from an infected horse.
BACKGROUND Grease is a disease that affects 
horses, causing inflammation of the fetlocks, 
which become covered by an oily secretion.
PREPARATION The specimen is rendered sterile, 
dissolved in purified water, then diluted  
and succussed.
Remedy profile
Malandrinum  is commonly used for skin 
problems characterized by greasy , pustular 
eruptions, rough, unhealthy-looking skin, or dry , 
scaly , itchy skin with cracks or fissures, especially 
on the hands and feet during cold weather. The 
remedy may also be given as an antidote to any 
adverse effects of a smallpox vaccination.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  In the evening.Mandragora officinarum
MANDRAGORA
COMMON NAMES Common mandrake,  
devil’s apple.
ORIGIN Native to the Mediterranean region  
of Europe.
BACKGROUND Legend attributed magical 
aphrodisiac properties to the mandrake root.  
It is highly toxic and narcotic, and is no longer 
used herbally .
PREPARATION The root is dried and macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Mandragora  is best suited are 
prone to changeable moods, such as crying 
spells alternating with feelings of euphoria.  
They may be in a state of “aroused exhaustion,” 
simultaneously sleepy and hyperactive. They are  
hypersensitive, particularly to noise, but also to 
smell; symptoms are violent in nature.
The classic symptom profile associated with 
Mandragora  focuses on abdominal pain that is 
worse on the upper right side and better for 
bending backward. The remedy may also help 
limbs that feel heavy , bruised, and sore, as if 
from muscular exertion, and may ease sciatica 
with burning pain that is worse on the right 
side. A further use is for congestive headaches 
that are better for cold air and cold compresses.
Symptoms better  For urinating; for bending 
backward; for rest; for continuous movement;  
for warm compresses (except in the case  
of headaches).
Symptoms worse  For damp and stormy weather; 
between 3 a.m. and 5 a.m.
Manganum metallicum
MANGANUM MET.
COMMON NAME Manganese.
ORIGIN Occurs primarily in pyrolusite  
and rhodonite.
BACKGROUND This metal was discovered in 1774. 
After iron, it is the second most common metal 
in Earth’s crust. It is most often used for 
industrial purposes to make alloys of steel  
and copper.
PREPARATION Manganese is triturated with  
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Manganum met.  is most appropriate for those 
who are open, friendly , and helpful. They are 
orderly and conscientious and, if unable to  
be of help to others, tend to feel restless, lost, 
and irritable.
The remedy is most commonly given when 
the bones are extremely sensitive, especially  in children who have been experiencing rapid 
growth. Symptoms are usually better for lying 
down. Manganum met.  is also prescribed for ear 
conditions such as earaches, temporarily 
reduced hearing, tinnitus, and great sensitivity 
to noise and wind. Earaches seem to begin 
elsewhere in the body and travel to the ear.
Symptoms better  For a change of air; for lying 
down; for sad music.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; at night;  
for touch; for speaking.
Medicago sativa
ALFALFA
COMMON NAMES Alfalfa, lucerne.
ORIGIN Native to Asia, north Africa, and Europe.
BACKGROUND Cultivated for thousands of years as 
a fodder plant, alfalfa is highly nutritious and 
detoxifying, and has long been used herbally 
and in cooking.
PREPARATION The fresh aerial parts are finely 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Alfalfa  is usually given in the mother tincture 
form as a tonic for conditions associated with 
malnutrition or great weight loss, such as 
cancer, anorexia, nervous indigestion, 
insomnia, and chronic fatigue syndrome. 
There may be constant hunger or an 
increased appetite, particularly in the middle 
of the morning, and a craving for sweet foods. 
Further symptoms may include a left-sided 
headache or a heavy , dull sensation in the 
back of the head.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  In the evening.
Melilotus officinalis syn. M. arvensis
MELILOTUS
COMMON NAMES Melilot, yellow melilot,  
sweet clover.
ORIGIN Native to Europe, temperate parts  
of Asia, and north Africa, and naturalized 
in North America.
BACKGROUND This sedative herb can be used 
medicinally to relieve spasms, reduce 
inflammation, and as a decongestant.
PREPARATION The fresh, flowering tops, without 
the woody stems, are finely chopped and 
steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Melilotus  is best suited to people who are highly 
agitated, talkative, suspicious, insane, and 
possibly even suicidal. They often worry about 
being poisoned, fear the police, and fail to 
recognize familiar people and places. 

•155 MINOR REMEDIES
The remedy is used mainly as a treatment for 
throbbing headaches with a feeling of violent 
blood congestion in the head, as if blood is 
going to burst out of it. A red face, bloodshot 
eyes, and dizziness are further common 
symptoms that occur in conjunction with the 
headaches, while weariness, a feverish sensation, 
and a hot face may precede them. The feeling of 
congestion may be eased by nosebleeds. 
Melilotus  may also be prescribed to treat 
circulatory problems with a sensation of 
engorgement in other parts of the body .
Symptoms better  For bleeding, such as 
nosebleeds or menstruation; for profuse 
urination; for changes in position.
Symptoms worse  For changes in the weather; for 
the approach of a storm; during menopause.
Micrurus corallinus syn. Elaps corallinus
ELAPS
COMMON NAME Brazilian coral snake.
ORIGIN Found in Brazil.
BACKGROUND This poisonous snake has roughly 
200 rings on its belly , which are colored alternately bright black and red.
PREPARATION Venom from a live snake is 
triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Elaps  tend to be 
rather intense, haughty , and suspicious. They 
are often depressed and long to be alone, yet 
also fear being left alone in case something 
horrible happens. In addition, they fear 
developing a serious illness such as a stroke, 
and feel afraid and miserable during wet 
weather. Generally , they are very sensitive to 
the cold.
The blood is commonly affected in people 
who benefit from Elaps . There may be 
hemorrhages or other discharges characterized 
by black blood. In addition, the remedy is 
given for right-sided paralysis following a 
stroke. Despite a chilly sensation in the 
stomach, there may be a craving for ice, 
salads, fruits, and yogurt.
Symptoms better  For rest; for walking.
Symptoms worse  For cold; at night; for the 
approach of a storm; for touch.
Moschus moschiferus
MOSCHUS
COMMON NAME Musk deer.
ORIGIN Found in northeastern and central Asia, 
and in northern India.
BACKGROUND Male musk deer secrete a waxy 
substance called musk, which has a heady scent 
that is widely used in the manufacture of 
perfume. Musk also has a strong reputation as 
an aphrodisiac.
PREPARATION The musk is dried and macerated in 
alcohol before being diluted and succussed.
Remedy profile
Moschus  is best suited to people who  
are bustling, overexcited, and prone to 
uncontrollable laughter. They tend to be 
quarrelsome and may express violent  
anger. Often physically awkward and  
with confused speech, they may be 
preoccupied and absent-minded. Their 
feelings of anxiety and fear of death  
may lead to hysteria, and they may 
experience intense sexual excitement  
even if they are elderly.
Key symptoms associated with Moschus  
include heightened physical and mental 
tension, which may cause spasms, twitches, 
and seizures in the muscles. General 
coldness is another characteristic symptom, 
or a chill in a specific area of the body; for 
instance, one cheek may be red but cold, 
the other pale but hot.  The remedy is prescribed chiefly for fainting 
that is triggered by the slightest excitement, 
such as scolding or anger, or by eating, 
menstruation, or heart disease. In addition, 
Moschus  is given for chest spasms, and spasms 
in the abdominal muscles or diaphragm, such 
as hiccups.
Symptoms better  For open air; for warmth; for 
rubbing the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for any excitement; for 
suppressing symptoms; for pressure on the 
affected area.
Murex purpurea & M. trunculus
MUREX
COMMON NAMES Murex, purple snail.
ORIGIN Found off the shores of the Mediterranean 
and Adriatic seas.
BACKGROUND These mollusks produce a juice that 
was formerly used to make a rich, dark dye 
called T yrian purple.
PREPARATION The juice secreted by either 
Murex  species is dried and then triturated 
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Murex  is given mainly to women. It is most 
appropriate for those who are thin, wiry , 
nervous, and affectionate, with a high libido. 
They may have a tendency to develop deep 
depression, hypochondria, or a fear of illness.
The remedy is strongly associated with 
problems of the female reproductive  
organs, especially intense menstrual pain 
accompanied by great impatience and a desire 
to die. It is also used if, prior to menstruation, 
there is pain so severe that it causes 
unconsciousness. In addition, breasts that  
are painful, perhaps developing benign 
tumors, may respond to Murex . Pain  
typically extends diagonally upward from  
the right ovary to the left breast. There is  
a great awareness of the uterus, which may 
feel constricted, dry , and sore, as if it has  
been wounded. The genitals feel as if they  
are being pushed out of the body , and there  
is nausea and great weakness, which may 
cause prostration.
Murex  may be prescribed for digestive 
problems in women, particularly if the 
symptoms include a sinking, empty sensation  
in the stomach and a desire to eat. It may also 
be used during menopause if the bowels  
are very sensitive.
Symptoms better  Before menstruation; for 
pressure on and support of the affected area;  
for sitting and crossing the legs.
Symptoms worse  During menstruation; for  
touch; for lying down; after sleep.MELILOTUS 
OFFICINALIS  
(Melilot)

156 •MINOR REMEDIES
Mygale lasiodora syn. M. avicularis, 
Aranea avicularis
MYGALE LAS.
COMMON NAMES Mygale, Cuban spider.
ORIGIN Found mainly in South America.
BACKGROUND This hairy , bird-catching spider 
weaves tube-shaped nets between tree leaves 
to capture its prey .
PREPARATION The whole, live spider is steeped 
in alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Mygale las.  is best suited to people who are 
restless, anxious, fearful, and delirious. They 
may talk deliriously about work, fear death, 
and have a high sex drive.
The remedy is generally prescribed for 
twitching, convulsive movements, possibly 
accompanied by nausea, dimmed vision, and 
heart palpitations. It is also used for chorea, 
especially when this affects the muscles of the 
upper body , including the face. The tongue is so 
dry that words may seem to be “jerked” out on 
speaking. During sleep there may be restlessness, 
ridiculous dreams, and grinding of teeth.
Symptoms better  During sleep.
Symptoms worse  In the morning; for sitting;  
for eating.
Myristica fragrans syn. Nux moschata
NUX MOSCH.
COMMON NAME Nutmeg.
ORIGIN Native to the Molucca 
Islands of Indonesia, but 
now widely cultivated.
BACKGROUND Although  
best known now as a 
culinary spice, nutmeg has 
long been used medicinally by several 
cultures, although only in low doses.
PREPARATION The whole, fresh or dried 
nutmegs are treated with lime before being 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Overexcited, exaggerated senses are typical in 
those who respond best to Nux mosch. , as are 
rapidly alternating emotions, such as laughing 
and crying in turn. They may feel as if they 
have two heads, or as if one part of them is 
able to watch another part. These people have 
a sense of detachment from ordinary life, 
feeling as if they are wrapped in cotton wool.
The classic symptom picture for Nux mosch.  
is of confusion, dizziness, fainting, loss of 
coordination, and great, even overwhelming, 
drowsiness. Extreme “dryness” in the 
digestive system may be treated by the remedy , especially if there is the classic 
drowsiness. Symptoms typically include 
chronic constipation with fullness and 
bloating in the abdomen, and a tongue so  
dry that it sticks to the roof of the mouth.
Symptoms better  For warmth and heat; for 
open air.
Symptoms worse  For cold weather; for 
emotional stress and shock; for pregnancy.
Naja naja syn. N. tripudians
NAJA
COMMON NAME Indian cobra.
ORIGIN Native to India, although now found  
in Asia and tropical Africa.
BACKGROUND Indian Ayurvedic doctors have 
long used the poisonous venom of this snake 
for nervous and blood disorders.
PREPARATION The venom is dried and 
triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Naja feel 
unfortunate and deeply wronged, but tend  
to exaggerate or take their problems out  
of context. They often feel confused, with  
a sensation of duality , forgetful, sad, 
tremulous, weak, and chilly .
Naja is prescribed chiefly for heart 
symptoms, particularly those affecting the 
valves. Symptoms typically include heart 
murmurs, a slow or racing pulse, violent 
palpitations with choking and an inability  
to speak, a valvular lesion (abnormality of the 
structure or function of the valve), and angina 
with pain extending down the left arm and 
up to the throat and neck. Naja may be used 
for a heart that has become enlarged due to 
being forced to work harder in order to push 
blood through damaged valves. The internal 
organs feel as if they are drawn together or 
screwed up. Sleep may be restless or inhibited 
by a sense of suffocation at night.
Symptoms better  For driving in the open air; 
for lying on the right side.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for the pressure 
of clothes, especially collars; for stimulants; for 
lying on the left side.
Natrum arsenicum
NAT. ARS.
COMMON NAME Sodium arsenate.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND These colorless, transparent 
prismatic crystals are used medicinally only  
in homeopathy .
PREPARATION The compound is triturated with 
lactose sugar.Remedy profile
A history of grief and suppressed emotions  
is typical in people for whom Nat. ars.  is  
best suited. Despite being high achievers  
and ambitious perfectionists, they are prone 
to forgetfulness and poor concentration. 
Often suspicious, they tend to bottle up  
their emotions, and are easily frightened  
or startled. Their sleep may be restless  
or heavy , and they may wake as if  
from fright.
The key affinity for Nat. ars.  is with the 
chest, which generally feels dry , tight, and 
oppressed. There may be breathlessness or  
a dry , hacking cough, great sensitivity to 
smoke or dust, restlessness, and chilliness 
with a preference for wrapping up warmly 
and sitting by a fire.
Symptoms better  For bending forward.
Symptoms worse  On waking in the morning; for 
the slightest exertion; for jarring; for pressure 
on the affected area.
Natrum fluoricum
NAT. FLUOR.
COMMON NAME Sodium fluoride.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND In some countries, sodium 
fluoride is added in minute quantities to  
the water supply to reduce dental decay .
PREPARATION Sodium fluoride is triturated  
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Nat. fluor .  is typically given to those who  
are deeply insecure, needing contact with 
many different people in order to feel that 
they “belong.” They tend to be highly 
sensitive, easily hurt, and feel that they  
do not fit in. Prone to impulsive sexual 
relationships, they may also develop  
long-standing, passionate liaisons.
Any physical symptoms typically occur on 
the right side, and sleeping on the left side is 
preferred. Symptoms may include cold sweats 
in the armpits, an aversion to sour-tasting 
things, and a desire for alcohol.
Symptoms better  For being outside; for  
violent movement.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for sun; for warmth; 
between 11 a.m. and 9 p.m.
Natrum phosphoricum
NAT. PHOS.
COMMON NAME Sodium phosphate.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND These crystals were used in the 
18th and 19th centuries for intestinal worms, MYRISTICA  
FRAGRANS   
(Nutmeg)

•157 MINOR REMEDIES
and chosen by Dr. Schüssler as a “biochemic” 
tissue salt  (see page 90) .
PREPARATION Sodium phosphate crystals are 
triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Responsible people who find it difficult to 
delegate tend to respond most effectively to 
Nat. phos.  Despite being generally friendly 
and sympathetic, they are highly self-
contained, finding it hard to talk about their 
problems and tending to become withdrawn 
from loved ones. Fears of the dark, insects, 
storms, illness, and death are typical, as is 
being easily startled by noise.
Nat. phos.  is used primarily to treat 
digestive disorders characterized by excess 
acidity and sour discharges. There may be  
a feeling of emptiness in the abdomen and 
chest, and a tendency to vomit or produce 
sour belches. Cravings for strong-tasting, 
spicy foods, salt, and fried eggs are associated 
with Nat. phos.  It may also help bottle-fed 
babies who are failing to thrive.
Symptoms better  For cold.
Symptoms worse  For storms; after sexual 
intercourse; for bitter foods; for fatty foods;  
for sugar; for milk.
Natrum sulphuricum
NAT. SULPH.
COMMON NAMES Sodium sulfate, Glauber’s salt, 
sal mirabile.
ORIGIN Occurs naturally in the mineral waters  
of some saltwater lakes, but it is chemically 
prepared for homeopathic use.
BACKGROUND The main mineral salt in many spa 
waters, such as those at Carlsbad, sodium 
sulfate was also identified by Dr. Schüssler as 
one of his “biochemic” tissue salts  (see page 90) .
PREPARATION Sodium sulfate is triturated with 
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Nat. sulph.  is best suited to people who are 
serious, reserved, responsible, and focused  
on work, yet paradoxically highly sensitive: 
music may move them to tears. They may  
feel isolated from intimate, committed 
relationships, perhaps after losing a partner.
Nat. sulph.  has an affinity with head 
symptoms, such as headaches due to injury , 
or those accompanied by increased salivation 
or strong intolerance to light. It is prescribed 
for severe or suicidal depression, and for 
profound mental changes, possibly with 
suicidal thoughts, following a head injury .
Nat. sulph.  is also a major remedy for asthma 
brought on by damp conditions. In addition, it has an affinity with the digestive system,  
liver, gallbladder, pancreas, and spleen.  
Liver conditions treated by the remedy include 
hepatitis and gallstones with bitter belching, 
colicky abdominal pains, and jaundice.  
There may be watery stools, especially on  
rising in the morning.
Symptoms better  For warm, dry air; for 
changing position; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For damp; for night air; for 
head injuries; for lying on the left side.
Natrum tetraboracicum
BORAX
COMMON NAMES Borax, tincal,  
sodium tetraborate.
ORIGIN Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND In the 19th century , borax was  
a traditional Western medicine for treating 
mouth ulcers and labor pains.
PREPARATION Borax is triturated with  
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Those for whom Borax  is most appropriate are 
irritable, angry , and passionate. They tend to  
be very fearful, even of the slightest noise, and 
prone to phobias. If pregnant, women suited  
to Borax  dread labor. Mental activity or stress 
causes nausea, giddiness, and a fear of  
falling, which become worse for downward  
movement, such as that of an escalator. 
Children may feel worse for being carried  
or swung downward.
Classic symptoms associated with Borax   
focus particularly on the mucous membranes  
of the digestive tract and the skin. In children, 
there may be weight loss and a failure to thrive.
The remedy is used for painful ulcers that 
develop in the mouth or on the tongue, and for 
ulceration that extends down through the  
whole gastrointestinal tract. Further symptoms 
may include cold sores on the lips, a hot, dry 
mouth containing a white fungal growth, and 
increased salivation during teething.
Symptoms better  In the morning; for pressing  
on or holding the painful area.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp;  
for sudden noises; for downward or  
upward movement.
See also Phobias,  page 211
Nerium oleander
OLEANDER
COMMON NAMES Oleander, rose bay .
ORIGIN Native to the eastern Mediterranean  
or possibly farther east, as far as China, but 
now widely naturalized.BACKGROUND The plant and its vapors are  
very toxic: in 1844, some soldiers died after 
eating meat roasted over a fire of oleander 
wood. In 19th-century southern Europe, 
bathing in an oleander decoction was  
a treatment for killing lice and fleas.
PREPARATION The fresh leaves are gathered 
before flowering, chopped finely , and  
steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Oleander  is typically given to people with  
a dull, sad mental state. They are unable  
to think clearly , and lack self-confidence.
Skin symptoms are the main focus for 
Oleander , and it may be used to treat dry , 
itching, flaking eruptions, especially on the 
scalp: dandruff, cradle cap, eczema, and 
psoriasis may all be helped. The skin is 
violently itchy and burning, as if it is being 
bitten by lice. The slightest friction on the 
skin causes soreness and chapping. There 
may be trembling and weakness, and 
symptoms are generally made worse by  
eating oranges and other citrus fruits.
Symptoms better  For scratching; for lying down.
Symptoms worse  For rubbing the affected 
area; for the friction of clothing on the affected 
area; for undressing; after breast-feeding.
See also Severe eczema,  page 194NERIUM  
OLEANDER   
(Oleander)

158 •MINOR REMEDIES
Nicotiana tabacum
TABACUM
COMMON NAME  Tobacco plant.
ORIGIN  Native to tropical America, but now 
cultivated worldwide.
BACKGROUND  Tobacco was a traditional Mayan 
treatment for asthma, convulsions, and skin 
complaints, and has long been smoked on the 
American continent. It is no longer used 
medicinally , but is still used in cigarettes and  
as an insecticide.
PREPARATION   The dried, unfermented leaves are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
The remedy is best suited to people who  
feel wretched and gloomy . They are usually 
unable to concentrate for long.
Severe nausea is a key symptom treated  
by T abacum . The nausea is similar to that 
experienced by someone on inhaling their  
first cigarette, and causes a deathly , icy cold 
sensation. It may be used for motion sickness 
or acute digestive upset, especially during 
pregnancy or chemotherapy . T abacum  is also 
thought to help ease acute diarrhea or, 
conversely , habitual constipation with rectal 
paralysis or spasms. A sensation of obstruction 
or constriction in the rectum or intestines, with 
weakness and cramping pain, is typical.
Symptoms better  For cold and cold compresses 
on the affected area; at twilight; for uncovering 
the abdomen; for vinegar and sour foods  
or drinks.
Symptoms worse  For extremes of heat and cold; 
in the evening; for lying on the left side; for the 
movement of a car or boat; for opening the eyes.
Onosmodium virginianum
ONOSMODIUM
COMMON NAME  False gromwell.
ORIGIN  Found in eastern North America.
BACKGROUND  It is thought that this plant, like its 
close relative Lithospermum , may suppress 
ovulation in women and reduce blood sugar 
and thyroxine levels.
PREPARATION  The whole, fresh plant is 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy is given primarily to women who 
are physically and mentally worn out. 
Confused, indecisive, and aimless, they may 
feel as if their emotions are working in slow 
motion. Their memory is often weak, and they 
are unable to finish sentences when speaking.
Physically , Onosmodium  is associated with 
exhaustion characterized by trembling,  a sensation of heaviness, and lack of 
coordination. There may be diminished or 
absent sexual desire in both men and women. 
Onosmodium  may also be given for eye strain, in 
cases where the eyes feel tense and strained on 
reading small print, and distances are misjudged 
due to slow eye accommodation or adjustment.
Symptoms better  For undressing; for sleep; for 
lying on the back; for eating; for cold drinks.
Symptoms worse  For warm, humid air; for 
straining the eyes; for sexual excess.
Origanum majorana syn. Majorana hortensis
ORIGANUM
COMMON NAME  Sweet marjoram.
ORIGIN  Found in regions bordering  
the Mediterranean sea.
BACKGROUND  Used 
mainly as a 
culinary flavoring, 
sweet marjoram is also 
prescribed in herbal 
medicine for anxiety , 
flatulence, menstrual pain,  
and insomnia.
PREPARATION  The fresh, 
finely chopped aerial 
parts in flower are 
steeped in alcohol.
Remedy 
profile
Women who experience 
sexual problems, 
especially those who are 
obsessed by sexual thoughts and those who 
have a constant desire to masturbate, are likely 
to benefit most from Origanum . They may be 
restless, finding it difficult to stay still, and as  
a result become fanatical about working out, 
turning to sports such as running to burn  
off energy . Breasts and nipples may become 
swollen, itchy , and painful. An intense level of 
sexual addiction may indicate relationship 
difficulties or a history of sexual abuse.
Symptoms better  For being occupied.
Symptoms worse  For lying down; at night.
 
Paeonia officinalis
PAEONIA
COMMON NAME  Peony .
ORIGIN  Native to Europe and Asia.
BACKGROUND  Culpeper, the 17th-century English 
herbalist, claimed that the root of this herb 
would prevent epilepsy in children if hung 
around their necks.
PREPARATION  The fresh, finely chopped root, dug 
in spring, is steeped in alcohol.Remedy profile
This remedy is given mostly for problems  
in the rectum and anus such as fissures and 
hemorrhoids, although it may also help to  
treat terrifying nightmares, particularly those 
involving ghosts. It is used for intense, burning 
pain in the anus during and after passing stools, 
followed by a chilly sensation. The pain may be 
very severe during the night and eased only by 
walking, rolling on the floor, or lying for hours 
with the buttocks spread apart.
Symptoms better  For warm compresses  
on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  At night; for 
touch or pressure on the 
affected area.
Palladium metallicum
PALLADIUM 
MET.
COMMON NAME  Palladium.
ORIGIN  Found in Columbia, Brazil, Russia, and  
South Africa.
BACKGROUND  First isolated in 1803 by the 
English physicist William Wollaston, this metal 
was named in honor of the asteroid Pallas, 
which had recently been discovered.
PREPARATION  The metal is triturated with  
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Palladium met.  is most suitable for people 
who need approval and praise. They tend  
to interpret things in a self-centered light  
and constantly feel neglected, insulted,  
and unappreciated. Usually enjoying 
company, they behave in an attention-
seeking, excited way, but may later  
collapse from exhaustion and fear of 
imagined slights.
The classic symptom picture for this 
remedy focuses on the uterus and ovaries. 
Ovarian pains and cysts tend to be right-
sided. The pains are worse for jarring, after 
menstruation, and for excitement; and 
better for bending the legs and lying on the 
left side. The uterus may prolapse or 
become displaced, and an infection may 
develop in the abdomen.
Palladium met.  may also be used to treat 
pains in the head and limbs, including 
headaches that develop across the top of  
the head from one ear to another. They  
are often accompanied by irritability  
and impatience. Tired, cold, or tense  
limbs may respond well to the remedy .  
In addition it is prescribed to ease the pain  
of sprained limbs.ORIGANUM 
MAJORANA   
(Sweet marjoram)

•159 MINOR REMEDIES
Symptoms better  For sleep; for passing stools; 
for rubbing the affected area; for touch or 
pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For emotional excitement;  
after social functions; for standing;  
for exertion; after menstruation.
Panax pseudoginseng
PANAX GINSENG
COMMON NAMES  San qi ginseng, tienchi ginseng.
ORIGIN  Native to Bhutan and northeast India.
BACKGROUND  In Chinese medicine this herb is 
reputed to clear the mind and make the limbs 
elastic and dynamic. It is considered to be 
a tonic and aphrodisiac.
PREPARATION  The dried root is steeped in alcohol, 
diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Panax ginseng  is typically given to people who 
are experiencing a general sense of stiffening 
up in the body . The limbs tend to feel heavy , 
and the joints contract and stiffen up. 
Paralytic weakness, rheumatic pain, and 
sciatica may be helped by the remedy . People 
who benefit from it often feel worse in the 
open air, and are prone to respiratory 
problems. Generally there is a sensation  
of weakness in the sexual organs, possibly  
as a result of excessive sexual intercourse, 
although there may be no diminishing  
of sexual desire.
Symptoms better  For walking.
Symptoms worse  For open air;  
at night; for bending and turning.
Pareira brava syn.  
Chondrodendron tomentosum
PAREIRA
COMMON NAMES  Pareira, pareira brava.
ORIGIN  Found in Panama, Brazil, Bolivia,  
and Peru.
BACKGROUND  Notoriously used by native South 
Americans to make curare, an arrow poison,  
the root of this plant is also used herbally as  
a diuretic, to increase menstrual flow , and  
to reduce fever.
PREPARATION  The fresh root is steeped in alcohol, 
diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People for whom Pareira  is best suited tend  
to have a constant urge to urinate, with great 
straining and painful urination. There is 
typically severe pain radiating down the thigh, 
and it may be possible to urinate only in certain 
positions. In men, there may be severe pain in 
the penis. Excruciating pains may develop on the left side of the lower back. The urine may 
contain thick, stringy , white mucus or a red 
precipitate. Pareira  may also be helpful for 
itching in the urethra, kidney colic, an enlarged 
prostate gland, and prostate disorders with  
urine retention.
Symptoms better  For being on the hands and 
knees; for pressing the head against the floor.
Symptoms worse  After midnight; after urinating.
Passiflora incarnata
PASSIFLORA
COMMON NAME  Passion flower.
ORIGIN  Native to the southern US and  
Central and South America, and now 
cultivated worldwide.
BACKGROUND This plant has long been used by 
indigenous peoples in Central and North 
America for its valuable sedative and 
tranquilizing properties.
PREPARATION  The fresh or dried leaves, 
gathered in spring, are finely chopped and 
steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
The classic symptom linked with Passiflora  is 
insomnia. Those who respond best to the 
remedy tend to lie awake at night and become 
exhausted. They are prone to odd sensations; 
they may feel that their eyeballs are protruding, as if being pushed out of their 
heads, or that the tops of their heads are 
lifting off. On lying down they may feel that 
their heels are rising up in the air. Passiflora  is 
considered particularly effective for alcoholics 
and screaming children.
The remedy may also help whooping  
cough that is worse at night, and insomnia 
accompanied by hemorrhoids, pain in  
the coccyx, or discomfort during or just  
before menstruation.
Symptoms better  For remaining quiet.
Symptoms worse  At night; for mental  
anxiety and excitement; for exhaustion;  
after meals.
Phytolacca americana
PHYTOLACCA
COMMON NAMES  Virginia pokeroot, reading 
plant, garget, pocon.
ORIGIN  Native to North America, and 
naturalized in the Mediterranean region.
BACKGROUND  Used by native Americans for  
a range of complaints from rheumatoid 
arthritis to hemorrhoids, this plant is  
highly potent and toxic in excess.
PREPARATION  The fresh root is unearthed  
during the fall, finely chopped, and macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy has a strong affinity with the 
glands. It may be given for mastitis with 
hardness, burning, and pain in the breasts  
that radiates through the whole body on 
breast-feeding. Breast ulcers, hard lumps,  
and even breast cancer may also be helped,  
as may psoriasis.
Phytolacca  may be used for hard, inflamed 
neck glands, with pain in the throat on 
swallowing. The tonsils may be inflamed, 
painful, and discolored dark red, and the tip  
of the tongue may be red. Inflamed parotid 
glands—for example during mumps—may be 
helped by the remedy , as may mononucleosis. 
Breathing feels difficult, restricted, and 
oppressed, with a sense of suffocation  
and emptiness in the chest.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for open air;  
for dry weather; for rest; for lying on the  
painful side.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp 
weather; for prolonged movement;  
on starting to move; for  
hot drinks.
See also Psoriasis,  page 195 ; 
Breast problems,  page 201 ; Mumps,  
page 252 ; Mononucleosis,  page 254PASSIFLORA  
INCARNATA   
(Passion flower)

160 •MINOR REMEDIES
Piper cubeba
CUBEBA
COMMON NAMES  Cubeb, tailed pepper.
ORIGIN  Native to Indonesia and widely 
cultivated in tropical Asia.
BACKGROUND  The antiseptic and diuretic 
properties of the cubeb fruits are used in herbal 
medicine, and the oil may be used to flavor 
tobacco, pickles, and sauces.
PREPARATION  The dried, unripe fruits are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Cubeba  is best suited to people who are 
restless and easily startled. They are often 
thirsty , and may crave nuts and delicacies. 
Their libidos may be very high.
The remedy is typically used for mucous 
membrane inflammation, especially in the 
urinary tract. The symptom picture is of 
burning pain on urinating and profuse or 
frequent urination, possibly due to anxiety . 
Discolored, smarting urine, possibly containing 
blood, and a feeling of fullness are further 
typical symptoms. Infections such as cystitis or 
prostatitis (inflammation of the prostate glands) 
may be treated with Cubeba , as may gonorrhea.
Symptoms better  For getting up and  
walking around.
Symptoms worse  At night; in bed.
Plantago major
PLANTAGO
COMMON NAME Greater plantain.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe and temperate 
regions of Asia, where it grows wild.
BACKGROUND  Greater plantain has anti-
bacterial properties and is sometimes used 
herbally as a substitute for comfrey to stop 
bleeding and encourage tissue repair.
PREPARATION  The fresh root is finely chopped 
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Plantago  are dull, 
irritable, and impatient. Mental activity exhausts 
and flusters them, and this is made worse by 
physical exertion.
Key conditions for which this remedy may  
be prescribed include earaches and toothaches. 
Aches are typically caused by sharp, neuralgic 
pains, often in the head and ears. T winges  
of pain may move around the head from front 
to back, or from ear to ear, and there may be  
a sensation in the head as if the brain has  
turned over. Plantago  is also given for  
bed-wetting problems.
Symptoms better  For sleep; for eating.Symptoms worse  At night; for touch; for 
extremes of heat and cold.
Podophyllum peltatum
PODOPHYLLUM
COMMON NAMES  May apple,  
American mandrake.
ORIGIN  Native to northeastern North America.
BACKGROUND  May apple was used by native 
Americans and 19th-century settlers from 
Europe as a purgative, but was later found to 
be highly toxic to cells. It is being researched 
for treating certain cancers.
PREPARATION The fresh rhizome is dug up 
when the fruits are fully ripe, finely chopped, 
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those who benefit most from Podophyllum  
tend to be forgetful, particularly of words, 
depressed, afraid that they may die, and 
unrefreshed by sleep, which is restless.
Digestive tract disorders such as 
gastroenteritis are typically treated with this 
remedy . Generally , the lower part of the digestive 
tract and the liver are most affected. The 
appetite often wanes, perhaps because 
everything suddenly tastes sour or putrid, or 
because the smell of food is loathsome. Sour 
belching, vomiting, or diarrhea, particularly 
after eating or drinking, are typical of this 
symptom picture. Podophyllum  may ease 
abdominal cramps, or profuse, painless 
diarrhea, preceded by noisy gurgling. 
Diarrhea may be accompanied by a  
sinking feeling, as if the pelvic contents 
are going to prolapse.
Symptoms better  For warmth; in the 
evening; for rubbing or stroking the 
liver area; for bending forward;  
for lying on the abdomen; for  
yawning and stretching.
Symptoms worse  For 
early morning; in hot 
weather; for any 
movement; while 
being bathed or 
washed; for eating.
Polygala senega
SENEGA
COMMON NAMES  Seneca snake root, 
rattlesnake root.
ORIGIN  Native to North America and  
now cultivated in western Canada.
BACKGROUND The Seneca 
Indians of North America 
valued this plant as an antidote to snake bites, hence its common 
name. It was used herbally by native Americans 
for bronchitis, asthma, and whooping cough.
PREPARATION The root is unearthed in  
fall and dried. It is then powdered  
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Senega  is most appropriate for people whose 
mood is dull and depressed. They have  
a tendency to fly into sudden rages.
The remedy has a strong affinity with the 
respiratory tract, and is typically used for chest 
and catarrhal conditions such as coughs, 
bronchitis, and even tuberculosis, particularly  
in the elderly . The classic symptom picture 
includes chest pain, thick profuse clear mucus 
that is difficult to expel, and a sensation as 
though the lungs are pushed back against the 
spine. The throat may be raw and sore. There 
may be mucus in the throat that causes a 
scraping sensation on talking. Breathing  
may be short or hurried, with a painful, 
oppressed feeling in the lungs, as if they are 
being squeezed.
Symptoms better  For perspiring.
Symptoms worse  For windy weather; for 
walking in and breathing in cold, open  
air; for touch and pressure on the  
affected area.
Punica granatum
GRANATUM
COMMON NAME  Pomegranate
ORIGIN  Native to southwest Asia, 
and naturalized in Europe.
BACKGROUND  An ancient 
treatment for intestinal 
worms, the pomegranate  
was cited in the Ebers 
papyrus, written in Egypt 
c. 1500 BCE. The fruits, 
juice, and seeds all have 
culinary uses.
PREPARATION  The dried bark  
of the root and branches  
is macerated in alcohol.PUNICA 
GRANATUM  
(Pomegranate)

•161 MINOR REMEDIES
Remedy profile
Granatum  is best suited to people who are  
ill-humored, overly impressionable, and 
sensitive. Often dejected, discouraged, weary , 
and gloomy , they tend to be melancholic and 
prone to hypochondria.
The remedy is used primarily for the 
expulsion of tapeworms. The typical symptom 
picture may include nausea, excess salivation, 
dizziness, pale blue rings around the eyes, 
itching and tickling in the nose, and itching 
and tingling in the anus. There may be 
emaciation or a loss of appetite, or ravenous 
hunger with cravings for coffee and sour  
or juicy foods such as fruits.
Symptoms better  After dinner; after drinking 
cold water.
Symptoms worse  For looking upward;  
for walking; for the pressure of clothing;  
for alcohol.
Pyrogenium
PYROGEN.
COMMON NAME  Pyrogen.
ORIGIN  Decomposed, rotten meat.
BACKGROUND  The term pyrogen often  
applies to proteins produced in response  
to infection. They are also produced when 
flesh decomposes.
PREPARATION  Chopped, lean beef is soaked  
in water, sterilized, dissolved in purified 
water, then diluted and succussed.
Remedy profile
People who benefit most from Pyrogen.   
have a tendency to be hypersensitive,  
and have overactive brains. Restless and 
talkative, they often think and talk rapidly . 
They may feel insane and have bizarre 
physical sensations; for instance, that their 
body is “crowded with arms and legs.”  
These are most common during a fever.
Conditions usually treated by Pyrogen.  
include infections, fevers, suppuration, 
influenza, and septic states. Characteristic 
symptoms include aching, bruising, pain, 
great restlessness, and foul-smelling sweat, 
diarrhea, breath, and other discharges. 
Conditions may be acute or due to a prior 
infection. There may be red streaks  
on the skin from the limbs to the heart,  
or sore, recurring abscesses that never fully 
heal. The tongue may be red and shiny  
or coated.
The remedy may also be used to treat 
infection in the genital tract following 
childbirth or an abortion, and may help 
women who have a pelvic infection, or  
who have a fever during menstruation.Symptoms better  For heat; for a hot bath; for 
stretching; for changing position; for hot drinks.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for sitting.
Quercus robur
QUERCUS
COMMON NAMES  Oak, common oak, English oak.
ORIGIN  Found throughout the Northern 
Hemisphere and cultivated for its timber.
BACKGROUND  Sacred to the Druids and 
dedicated to the Norse god Thor, the oak has 
long been important in many cultures, both 
economically and in herbal medicine.
PREPARATION The acorns are steeped in alcohol 
until soft, then peeled, crushed, diluted in 
alcohol, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Quercus  tend  
to be nervous, weepy , and unable to speak 
clearly or think straight.
Chronic spleen disorders involving fluid 
retention are primarily associated with Quercus . 
It is used for an enlarged spleen, possibly due 
to recurrent malaria or to alcoholism. Quercus  
may relieve the effects of acute alcohol 
poisoning and lessen the desire for alcohol, 
although it will not cure alcoholism. Recurrent 
gout may also be helped by the remedy .
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  None known.
Radium bromatum
RADIUM BROM.
COMMON NAME Radium bromide.
ORIGIN  Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND  Radium is too unstable to exist in 
a pure form in nature, and usually combines 
with chlorine or bromine.
PREPARATION  The compound is dissolved in 
purified water, diluted, and succussed.Remedy profile
Radium brom.  is best suited to depressed, 
anxious people who need company and are 
afraid of being alone in the dark. Conditions 
arising from radiation poisoning or treatment, 
such as ulcers from X-ray burns or skin 
problems, are typically treated with the remedy . 
Skin symptoms are characterized by burning, 
dry , itchy , scaly eruptions, or by thickening or 
callousing of the skin: psoriasis, eczema, 
dermatitis, acne rosacea, nevi (skin blemishes), 
moles, ulcers, and even cancers may all respond 
to the remedy . Constricting neuralgic pains, 
acute rheumatic pains, and numbness may also 
be helped by Radium brom.
Symptoms better  For open air; for hot baths; 
for sleep; for eating.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for  
getting up from lying down; for shaving;  
for bathing.
Ranunculus bulbosus
RANUNCULUS BULB.
COMMON NAMES  Bulbous buttercup,  
bulbous crowfoot.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe, but now also 
common throughout North America.
BACKGROUND  The buttercup has been used 
medicinally since the time of ancient 
Greece. Toxic and irritant, it was mostly 
used externally for skin growths such as 
warts and blemishes.
PREPARATION  The whole plant in flower is 
finely chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy is most suited to those who  
are irritable, depressed, and quarrelsome.  
They feel weepy and inadequate, and  
worse for thinking about their symptoms. 
Restlessness and insomnia are common 
characteristic traits.
The classic symptom picture for Ranunculus 
bulb. includes muscle, joint, and skin problems, 
possibly occurring simultaneously . T ypical 
muscle problems include soreness, deep, 
bruising pain, and, particularly , chest pain 
between the ribs. The classic skin symptoms  
for this remedy focus on eczema or herpes, 
especially herpes zoster (shingles), with intense 
burning and itching.
Symptoms better  For warm weather; for warm 
compresses; for rest; for standing; for sitting 
bent forward.
Symptoms worse  For drafts or open air, 
especially damp, cold air; for stormy weather; 
for changes in temperature; for movement, 
particularly of the arms; for thinking about 
symptoms; for alcohol.QUERCUS ROBUR  
(Oak)

162 •MINOR REMEDIES
Raphanus sativus var. niger
RAPHANUS
COMMON NAME  Black radish.
ORIGIN  Native to southern Asia, but now widely 
cultivated worldwide.
BACKGROUND The ancient Romans used radish  
oil for skin diseases, and radish was a noted 
digestive stimulant in Chinese medicine  
by CE 659.
PREPARATION The fresh roots, dug up in spring 
before flowering, are finely chopped and 
steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those who benefit most from Raphanus  may feel 
“collapsed” and lacking in spirit. The remedy 
has a strong affinity with the digestive tract, and 
is given for extreme abdominal distension. A 
classic use of Raphanus  is for postoperative pain 
due to trapped gas, with gurgling and great 
swelling in the abdomen.
Symptoms better  For walking in the  
open air.
Symptoms worse  At night; for jarring; for 
coughing; for touch, even of the clothes;  
for laughing.
Resina piceae
ABIES NIG.
COMMON NAME Pine resin.
ORIGIN Resin from the black spruce ( Picea 
mariana ), found in northern North America, 
from Alaska to Newfoundland.
BACKGROUND The oil distilled from the wood of 
this tree is used largely in the manufacture  
of paints.
PREPARATION The resin from the tree is dried  
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Low-spirited, nervous people who are unable to 
concentrate or settle are best suited to Abies nig.  
They are lethargic and dull by day , yet cannot 
sleep at night. Abies nig.  is mainly associated 
with a sense of “blockage.” It is often used for 
indigestion with a knotted sensation, as if an egg 
or stone is lodged in the stomach. The stomach 
pain always develops after eating and, in an 
attempt to relieve the discomfort, there may be 
frequent belching, possibly with constipation, 
foul-smelling breath, and mild fever with 
alternating chills and fever. Tea and tobacco are 
often causative factors behind the Abies nig.  
symptom picture.
Symptoms better  For movement;  
for walking.
Symptoms worse  For tobacco; for tea;  
for eating.Rheum officinale  or R. palmatum
RHEUM
COMMON NAME  Rhubarb or Chinese rhubarb.
ORIGIN  Both species are native to China and 
Tibet, but are now grown worldwide.
BACKGROUND Long used in Chinese medicine, 
notably as a laxative, these non-culinary types  
of rhubarb were adopted by European doctors 
in the 18th century .
PREPARATION  The root of either species is dried 
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Rheum  is most suitable for those with sour 
moods who tend to be undemanding and 
withdrawn, yet restless and “quarrelsome in 
sleep.” Children who respond to Rheum  are full 
of fears, crying and restless at night. Both adults 
and children may tire rapidly .
Chronic, sour-smelling diarrhea is a key 
condition linked with Rheum.  The stools are 
sour-smelling, and may be yellow or green, 
frothy , or fermented. Further typical symptoms 
include sour-smelling breath and a sour taste to 
all foods, causing a loss of appetite. The remedy 
may also be used for nausea or colicky pain that 
feels worse for standing and is often accompanied 
by shivering and an urge to pass stools.
Symptoms better  For wrapping up; for warmth; 
for doubling over on lying down.
Symptoms worse  For hot weather; for teething; 
before, during, and after passing stools; for 
eating sour fruits in the summer.
Rhododendron chrysanthum
RHODODENDRON
COMMON NAMES Siberian rhododendron,  
yellow snow rose.
ORIGIN  Found mainly in alpine areas of Siberia, 
but also in mountainous regions of Asia  
and Europe.
BACKGROUND An infusion of this plant is  
a traditional Mongolian drink used by hunters 
to ease weary , painful limbs and for gout and 
rheumatic pains.PREPARATION The leafy shoots are dried and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Rhododendron  is most suited to nervous, 
overly sensitive people who are deeply 
affected by the weather. Prior to a storm, they 
may feel confused, excited, and faint, alternating 
feverish excitement with chaotic behavior.
The symptom picture for this remedy focuses 
primarily on joint problems such as gout, 
arthritis, or rheumatic pain. Symptoms may 
affect the fibrous tissues, small joints, bones, 
and nerves, often resulting in swollen joints, 
with tearing, wrenching pain that causes 
restlessness, weakness, and stiffness in the 
limbs. Joint pains may move around the body . 
The remedy may also be used to ease swelling 
in the scrotum (hydrocele).
Symptoms better  For warmth; for the heat of the 
sun; after a storm breaks; for wrapping up the 
head; for lying in bed with the limbs drawn up;  
for movement.
Symptoms worse  For rough or windy weather;  
for getting wet or catching cold; before storms; 
for changes in temperature; for rest; on beginning 
to move.
See also Hydrocele,  page 264
Rhus toxicodendron
RHUS TOX.
COMMON NAMES Poison ivy , poison oak.
ORIGIN Found widely in North America.
BACKGROUND  Native Americans used this plant  
to treat skin eruptions and nervous paralysis. 
Contact with its leaves produces redness, 
swelling, and blistering.
PREPARATION The fresh leaves, gathered at sunset 
just before the plant comes into flower, are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Rhus tox.  is particularly beneficial to people who 
are usually lively but shy , but restless and 
agitated when ill. Children who respond to the 
remedy tend to be overactive, restless, irritable, 
and malicious. If illness becomes chronic in 
these people, they may become fixed in their 
ways. Rhus tox.  is known primarily as a remedy 
for skin and joint disorders. It may be helpful 
for skin eruptions with blisters, followed by 
burning, red, swollen skin that tends to scale 
and flake off. Skin conditions such as chicken 
pox, shingles, herpes, eczema, rosacea, and 
diaper rash may all respond to the remedy . 
Musculoskeletal problems are another focus  
of Rhus tox.  It is used for acute rheumatic or 
arthritic pain, sciatica, restless legs, cramps, 
sprains, and strains.RHODODENDRON 
CHRYSANTHUM   
(Siberian rhododendron)

•163 MINOR REMEDIES
Symptoms better  For heat; for warm, dry 
weather; for hot baths; for continued 
movement; for nosebleeds.
Symptoms worse  For cold; in winter; for 
being chilled; for damp conditions; before 
storms; on beginning to 
move; during sleep.
See also Rosacea,  page 193 ; Severe 
eczema,  page 194 ; Osteoarthritis,  page 
196; Rheumatoid arthritis,  page 197 ; 
Sciatica,  page 218 ; Restless legs,  page 230 ; 
Diaper rash,  page 246 ; Chicken pox,  page 252
Rhus venenata syn. R. vernix
RHUS VEN.
COMMON NAMES Poison sumac, poison elder.
ORIGIN  Found throughout North America, from 
Canada to the Gulf of Mexico.
BACKGROUND More toxic than poison ivy ( see left ), 
this plant produces a volatile oil that can cause 
inflamed, blistering lesions, possibly affecting 
the whole body .
PREPARATION  The young, leafy twigs are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Gloomy , forgetful people are most likely to 
benefit from Rhus ven. , particularly if they feel 
unable to connect ideas together and have no 
will for life.
The physical symptoms associated with this 
remedy are similar to those treated by Rhus tox. , 
although the focus is more heavily on skin 
conditions. The classic symptom picture for 
Rhus ven.  includes flaking, itching skin, possibly 
with patches of thickening or hardening, and a 
tendency for the skin to crack. All symptoms 
are markedly worse in the morning.
Symptoms better  For open air; for hot baths; for 
gentle touch; for mild exercise.
Symptoms worse  For damp weather; for getting 
wet; in the morning; for touch and pressure on 
the affected area; for rest; on waking.
Ricinus communis
RICINUS
COMMON NAMES  Castor oil plant, Palma Christi, 
castor bean.ORIGIN  Native to east Africa and grown in hot 
climates, especially Africa and Asia.
BACKGROUND  The seeds of this plant are highly 
toxic, but the oil made from them has been 
used medicinally for centuries in many cultures, 
notably for constipation.
PREPARATION  The ripe seeds are steeped in 
alcohol, filtered, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
The digestive system is the primary focus of  
this remedy . T ypical symptoms treated include 
nausea, profuse vomiting, and diarrhea:  
Ricinus  is useful for children who are seriously 
prostrated by diarrhea. T ypically , there is  
severe dehydration and great thirst, but no 
desire to eat.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For pressure on the abdomen.
Rumex crispus
RUMEX CRISPUS
COMMON NAMES  Yellow dock, curled dock.
ORIGIN Native to Europe and Africa.
BACKGROUND Long used in Western herbal 
medicine, yellow dock is a mild laxative  
and also acts as a stimulant to the liver  
and gallbladder.
PREPARATION The fresh root is finely chopped  
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Rumex crispus  is best suited to low-spirited, 
serious people who are very restless in the 
evening. Their sleep is often wakeful, and 
unpleasant dreams and fantasies disturb them 
when asleep or awake. The throat and chest are 
the main focus of Rumex crispus.  There may be 
whooping cough, a dry , tickling cough, croup, 
or other hard, hacking cough, or asthma that is 
suffocating and choking on going to bed. There 
may be great concentration on the breathing 
and sensitivity to cold air.
Symptoms better  For wrapping up, including 
wrapping the head; for covering the mouth; for 
drinking; for sucking hard candy.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for open air; for 
breathing in cold air; for touch and pressure on 
the throat; for uncovering; for movement; for 
talking; for eating.
Ruta graveolens
RUTA
COMMON NAMES  Rue, herb-of-grace.
ORIGIN  Native to dry , sunny regions of 
Mediterranean countries.
BACKGROUND  Rue has been prescribed  
herbally since the time of ancient Greece and Egypt to induce abortion, strengthen  
the eyesight, and stimulate menstruation.
PREPARATION  The aerial parts, gathered as  
the plant is beginning to flower, are finely 
chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to the Ruta remedy are 
prone to feelings of anxiety and panic and tend 
to be weepy . They may be quarrelsome and 
suspicious, often feeling that they are being 
constantly deceived or watched.
The classic symptom picture for Ruta is  
of connective tissue problems with marked 
stiffness and pain in the muscles and tendons, 
often due to sprains, overuse of the muscles,  
or injury . The pain is typically sore, bruised, 
aching, and accompanied by restlessness. 
Repetitive strain injuries, eye strain, ganglions, 
and chronic arthritis may be helped by Ruta,  
as may a stiff, sore lower back or sciatica.
Symptoms better  For warmth; for lying on the 
back; for movement; for rubbing or scratching  
the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp air; for 
overexertion, injury, or sprains; for sitting;  
for menstruating; for eating uncooked or 
indigestible foods.
See also Eye strain,  page 220
RUTA GRAVEOLENS  
(Rue)RHUS 
TOXICODENDRON  
(Poison ivy)

164 •MINOR REMEDIES
Sambucus nigra
SAMBUCUS
COMMON NAMES  European elder, black elder.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe.
BACKGROUND  Used medicinally for millennia, 
elder became known as “nature’s medicine 
chest” and was also strongly linked to much 
European folklore.
PREPARATION  The fresh leaves and flowers are 
finely chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
The remedy is best suited to people who  
are constantly fretful, restless, easily frightened, 
and prone to trembling. Sambucus  is used 
mainly for respiratory problems. General 
symptoms associated with the remedy include 
severe weakness, and profuse continuous or 
intermittent sweating. The remedy may help 
respiratory conditions such as asthma, croup, 
whooping cough, or bronchitis, particularly 
when they occur on waking. Generally , there  
is hoarseness, with mucus and inflammation  
in the larynx but no desire to drink. During 
asthma attacks, a lack of oxygen may cause  
the face to turn blue.
Symptoms better  For wrapping up warmly;  
for sitting up in bed; for leaning over a table  
or chair back; for movement.
Symptoms worse  For dry, cold air; for heat; 
during the night; for lying down, especially  
with the head low; for rest.Sanguinaria canadensis
SANGUINARIA
COMMON NAMES  Bloodroot, red puccoon.
ORIGIN  Native to eastern North America.
BACKGROUND  Native Americans took bloodroot  
to induce therapeutic vomiting, and used the 
orange-colored juice of the root as a body paint 
and clothing dye.
PREPARATION  The rhizome, unearthed in fall, is 
dried and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Sanguinaria   
are confused and full of dread, and feel  
very weak and stupid. Despite feeling heavy , 
languid, and drowsy , they cannot sleep at  
night and the slightest noise wakes them up.  
An uncomfortable sensation of prickling 
warmth sometimes spreads over the  
whole body .
The classic symptom picture for this 
remedy is of irritation of the mucous 
membranes, particularly those of the 
respiratory system. Sanguinaria  may be 
given for hay fever accompanied by great 
sensitivity to grass, flowers, and scents, and 
by burning and dryness in the nose and 
throat. Other conditions that are typically 
associated with Sanguinaria  include asthma 
with catarrh and raw, burning membranes. 
Symptoms tend to affect the right side of 
the body more than the left.
Symptoms better  In the evening; for lying  
on the back; for lying on the left side;  
for sleep; for vomiting; for belching.
Symptoms worse  For cold and damp; for sun;  
for movement and touch; for lying on the  
right side; during menopause;  
for sweet foods.
Schoenocaulon officinale
SABADILLA
COMMON NAMES  Sabadilla, 
cebadilla.
ORIGIN  Found in Mexico,  
the West Indies, 
Guatemala, and 
Venezuela.
BACKGROUND  The bitter seeds 
of sabadilla contain the alkaloids veratridine and 
veratrine, which are used in insecticides.
PREPARATION  The ripe seeds are steeped in 
alcohol, filtered, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Sabadilla  is most appropriate for people who are 
nervous, easily startled, and prone to hysterical 
paroxysms following a fright.Key physical symptoms associated with  
this remedy include paroxysmal sneezing,  
an itchy , tingly nose, copious, watery catarrh, 
and chilliness. There may be throat pain and 
inflammation, with a constant desire to clear  
the throat. Sabadilla  is used chiefly for 
inflammation of the respiratory mucous 
membranes, possibly due to hay fever,  
asthma, tonsillitis, or a cold.
Symptoms better  For open air; for heat or 
wrapping up; for warm foods or drinks.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; at periodic, 
consistent intervals; for cold drinks.
Scorpio europaeus
SCORPION
COMMON NAME  Scorpion.
ORIGIN Found in central and southern Europe.
BACKGROUND  Scorpions were listed as a medicine 
in an ancient Egyptian medical papyrus, 
although their use is not known.
PREPARATION  The whole, live animal is macerated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Scorpion  is most effective for people who  
feel detached and disconnected from the  
world. Their mental state is dull and foggy ,  
and they are unable to concentrate on more 
than one thing at a time. This state of mind  
may be accompanied by anxiety about health, 
an aversion to work and to talking, and 
sensitivity to music. Their moods are  
usually very changeable, and they may  
have confused, troubling, vague, angry ,  
or erotic dreams.
Strong fears may be helped by Scorpion , 
especially those of driving and of accidents.  
A classic symptom is great fear, which is rooted 
in the abdomen, and may occur with sharp 
cramps below the ribs.
Symptoms better  For crying; for walking;  
for movement; for urinating; for eating.
Symptoms worse  At night; for bright light;  
for noise; for sitting; for breathing deeply;  
for pressure on the abdomen.
Scutellaria laterifolia
SCUTELLARIA
COMMON NAME  Virginia skullcap.
ORIGIN  Native to North America.
BACKGROUND  This plant was once used by  
the Cherokee Indians to promote menstruation, 
but has more recently been used widely  
as a sedative, especially for stress  
and tension.
PREPARATION  The whole, fresh plant, excluding 
the root, is steeped in alcohol.SAMBUCUS NIGRA  
(Elder)

•165 MINOR REMEDIES
Remedy profile
Scutellaria  is best suited to people 
who have a sense of foreboding 
and feel exhausted, confused, and 
unable to concentrate.
The typical symptom picture is of 
nervous exhaustion, possibly as a result 
of illness, continuous, tiring work, or 
over-studying. The remedy may help 
chronic fatigue syndrome, headaches 
with a sensation of the space in the 
head being too small for its contents, 
possible dizziness, twitching muscles, 
and sensitivity to light.
Symptoms better  At night; for  
movement in the open air.
Symptoms worse  For light; for noise;  
for smells; for eating.
Secale cornutum
SECALE
COMMON NAME  Ergot.
ORIGIN  From the fungus Claviceps purpurea , 
which grows mostly on cereal crops in Europe, 
North America, and Asia.
BACKGROUND  This fungus, largely found on rye, 
is used in a drug prescribed by Western 
medicine to halt bleeding.
PREPARATION  Ergot is collected while still 
immature, then dried, powdered, and macerated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who benefit most from Secale  often feel 
confused, suspicious, and fearful, and may even 
doubt their own sanity .
A key affinity for Secale  is with uterine 
problems in women. It is often used for uterine 
bleeding and hypercontraction of the muscles  
in the uterus. Secale  is given to strengthen weak 
contractions during labor, and for puerperal 
sepsis (infection in the genital tract after 
childbirth). It may also help menstrual cramps 
with dark, irregular bleeding, and a flow of 
watery blood between menstrual periods.
Symptoms better  For cold; for bathing; for 
stretching; for uncovering the body.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; for touch, even  
of sheets; before or after menstruating; in 
pregnancy; after miscarriage or labor.
Selenicereus grandiflorus
CACTUS GRAND.
COMMON NAME  Night-blooming cereus.
ORIGIN  Native to Central America and the  
West Indies.
BACKGROUND  Widely renowned for its beauty , 
this plant is also cultivated for use in a conventional rheumatic drug and is valued 
herbally as a remedy for the heart.
PREPARATION  Young, tender stems and flowers  
are collected in summer, finely chopped, and 
steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Sad, distracted people who tend to be anxious 
about their health are most likely to respond 
well to Cactus grand.
Classic symptoms associated with Cactus 
grand.  include constriction in the muscle fibers, 
and a painful feeling of the body being caged 
and twisted. The remedy is especially associated 
with pains in the heart, such as those triggered 
by angina. Heart conditions relieved by Cactus 
grand.  are typified by severe pain in the chest,  
as if it is being confined and squeezed by an 
iron band around the torso. The pain may 
extend into the left arm or hand and be 
accompanied by numbness.
Symptoms better  For open air; for sitting;  
for rest.
Symptoms worse  For walking; for lying on the  
left side; for lying on the back.
See also Angina,  page 185
Selenium metallicum
SELENIUM MET.
COMMON NAME  Selenium.
ORIGIN  Found in volcanic areas and in sulfide 
ores such as pyrite.
BACKGROUND  Selenium was one of the elements 
discovered by a Swedish chemist, Berzelius.  
In 1817 he named it after the Greek selene ,  or “moon,” an analogy  
with tellurium, from tellus  
or “earth.”
PREPARATION  The element is 
triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
People who benefit most 
from this remedy may have 
difficulties in connecting to  
or becoming intimate with 
others and may withdraw , 
even from close friends. Mental activity may 
cause them great exhaustion, and they may  
be very forgetful. Great weakness, particularly 
if the body temperature increases, is a classic 
feature associated with this remedy . It is  
used for conditions such as chronic fatigue 
syndrome and multiple sclerosis, when  
there is rapid mental and physical exhaustion, 
with unhealthy-looking skin, emaciation, 
constipation, hair loss, and possible 
malfunction of the nerves governing the 
genitourinary tract.
Symptoms better  For breathing cold air; after 
sunset; for drinking cold water.
Symptoms worse  For hot days; for drafts of air; 
for sleep; for talking; for passing stools.
Senecio aureus
SENECIO
COMMON NAMES  Life root, squaw weed
ORIGIN  Native to eastern North America.
BACKGROUND  Traditionally valued by native 
Americans for problems of the female 
reproductive system, life root is now 
considered by herbalists to be unsafe for 
internal use.
PREPARATION  The whole plant, including the 
root, is finely chopped and macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Senecio  is best suited to those who are  
restless, nervous, low-spirited, and unable  
to concentrate.
The remedy is typically prescribed for 
hemorrhaging in the mucous membranes. 
Bleeding in the lungs or the throat, in 
congested and inflamed kidneys, or during 
menstruation may all be helped by Senecio ,  
as may nosebleeds. Delayed or absent 
menstruation, accompanied by a thick  
vaginal discharge, appetite loss, excitability , 
and insomnia may also respond well to  
the remedy .
Symptoms better  For menstruation.
Symptoms worse  For dampness; for cold air; for 
sitting; during puberty; for sexual excitement.SELENICEREUS GRANDIFLORUS  
(Night-blooming cereus)

166 •MINOR REMEDIES
Serenoa repens syn. S. serrulata
SABAL
COMMON NAME  Saw palmetto.
ORIGIN  Native to southeastern North America.
BACKGROUND  Native Americans valued this plant 
as a food source and for its sedative and tonic 
medicinal properties.
PREPARATION  The fresh, ripe fruits are finely 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who benefit most from Sabal  tend to 
brood on their symptoms, yet are often angered 
by sympathy . They may be irritable, apathetic, 
introverted, depressed, and afraid to go to sleep.
This remedy is given mainly for problems of 
the genitourinary organs. T ypical symptoms 
treated include frequent urination, especially 
when this occurs at night, which may be due  
to cystitis. Urine retention due to prostate 
enlargement or gonorrhea may be helped  
by Sabal , as may inflammation in the seminal 
tubes, heavy , aching pains or, occasionally ,  
sharp pains in the bladder that extend to the 
abdomen or radiate down the thighs. Another 
typical symptom is a sensation of coldness in 
the bladder, possibly extending to the external 
genitals. Sabal  is also used for sexual or  
general fatigue.
Symptoms better  After sleep.
Symptoms worse  For cold, damp weather; before 
menstruating; for sympathy.
See also Prostate problems,  page 202
Silybum marianum syn. Carduus marianus
CARDUUS
COMMON NAMES  St. Mary’s thistle, milk thistle.
ORIGIN  Native to the Mediterranean region and 
grown throughout Europe.
BACKGROUND The flowerheads were traditionally 
grown to eat as a substitute for artichokes,  
and boiled as a spring tonic following the  
winter months.
PREPARATION  The ripe, dried seeds are soaked in 
water for one to two days and then macerated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Carduus  is most suitable for people who are 
completely run down, with the kind of total 
physical and mental exhaustion, blankness, and 
indifference that may arise following a hard life 
of physical labor, or that may be caused  
by alcoholism.
The classic symptom picture for Carduus  
is of acute or chronic liver problems and 
lung conditions such as asthma. The 
remedy may be used for severe liver and abdominal pain that is most marked when 
lying on the left side, or for gallbladder 
pain and gallstone colic. The stools are 
typically discolored and pale due to liver 
malfunction, or they may be dark due to 
internal bleeding in the digestive system.
Symptoms better  For sitting up in bed; after  
a nosebleed.
Symptoms worse  For movement; for lying on the 
left side; for alcohol.
Simarouba cedron syn. Simaba cedron, 
Quassia cedron
CEDRON
COMMON NAMES  Cedron, rattlesnake beans.
ORIGIN Found in Central America and  
northern Brazil.
BACKGROUND  Known in Panama as an antidote 
for snakebite and insect stings if chewed 
immediately after being bitten, cedron was also 
used for malaria or fever.
PREPARATION  Cotyledons (embryonic shoots) 
from the dried, ripe seeds are macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to Cedron  tend to be 
nervous, restless, and even hysterical, possibly 
experiencing depression following any nervous 
excitement. They may dread going to bed and 
fear their friends.
A characteristic of the complaints 
associated with Cedron  is that they tend to 
recur at exactly the same hour each day. 
The remedy is used for recurrent fevers, 
such as those associated with malaria, and 
for neuralgic pains and other nervous-
system conditions such as spasms or tics. 
Severe headaches or migraines, perhaps 
with nausea, fever, or cerebrospinal 
meningitis, may also respond to Cedron.
Symptoms better  For standing erect.
Symptoms worse  For open air; at the same  
time each day; after sleep.
Smilax officinalis syn. S. ornata,  
S. regelii, S. medica
SARSAPARILLA
COMMON NAMES Sarsaparilla, wild licorice.
ORIGIN  Native to Central and South America  
and Jamaica.
BACKGROUND  Long used medicinally by 
indigenous tribes in South America, 
sarsaparilla was introduced to Europe in  
the 17th century as a cure-all. It was later 
used to flavor root beer.
PREPARATION  The dried root is steeped in alcohol, 
diluted, and succussed.Remedy profile
Sarsaparilla  is most effective for people who  
are depressed and anxious, blaming their state 
of mind on the pain they feel. They tend also  
to feel the cold.
Sarsaparilla  has a strong affinity with the 
urinary tract. It is prescribed for cystitis 
characterized by a constant urge to urinate, pain 
as urination ends, and possibly blood or a sandy 
or gravelly precipitate in the urine. There may 
be involuntary dribbling of urine, especially on 
sitting down, and normal flow may only happen 
when in a standing position.
Symptoms better  For standing; for uncovering the 
neck and chest.
Symptoms worse  In the spring; for wet and  
cold weather; for movement; as urination ends; 
during menstruation.
Solidago virgaurea
SOLIDAGO
COMMON NAME Goldenrod.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe and Asia and 
naturalized in North America.
BACKGROUND  This herb has traditionally been 
used externally to heal wounds, thrush, ulcers, 
and insect bites, and internally for urinary  
tract infections.
SOLIDAGO 
VIRGAUREA  
(Golden rod)

•167 MINOR REMEDIES
PREPARATION  The fresh aerial parts are finely 
chopped and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
The classic symptom picture for Solidago  is  
of kidney disease, possibly with nausea, 
insomnia, a weak chest, and susceptibility  
to colds. Solidago  is used when the kidneys  
feel distended, sore, aching, and tender, with 
pain extending down to the thighs, or toward 
the bladder and abdomen. There are typically 
difficulties in passing urine, which is scanty and 
discolored, or clear and foul-smelling. The 
remedy may also be prescribed to treat fibroids.
Symptoms better  For profuse urination.
Symptoms worse  For pressure on the  
affected area.
See also Fibroids,  page 199
Spigelia anthelmia
SPIGELIA
COMMON NAMES  Pink root, annual wormgrass.
ORIGIN  Native to South America, but now found 
in the US and the West Indies.
BACKGROUND Pink root contains certain alkaloids 
that are used in the herbal treatment of  
heart disease.
PREPARATION  The dried aerial parts are macerated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
A sad, forgetful, “blank” temperament is 
characteristic of those who respond most 
effectively to this remedy . They are responsible 
people who suffer intense pain, causing great 
nervous agitation.
It is given chiefly for problems of the  
heart and the nervous system, especially  
if symptoms affect primarily the left side  
of the body , and if there are intense, violent 
pains. Spigelia  may be given for frequent 
palpitations that are violent, visible, and 
audible, for heart murmurs or valve disorders, 
and for rheumatic heart disease. It is also 
used for angina with constricting chest pains 
that extend down one or both arms, into  
the chest, and up to the throat. In addition, 
the remedy may be used for headaches, 
migraines, sinus infections, or neuralgic or 
rheumatic pain, especially if the symptoms 
are worse on the left side.
Symptoms better  For breathing in; for lying on 
the right side with the head higher than the body; 
for steady pressure on the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For changes in the weather;  
for touch; for lying on the left side; for movement;  
for tobacco.
See also Angina,  page 185 ; Rheumatoid arthritis,  
page 197 ; Neuralgia,  page 268Spongilla fluviatilis syn. S. lacustris
BADIAGA
COMMON NAME  Freshwater sponge.
ORIGIN  Found in Russia and Europe.
BACKGROUND  In Russia this sponge is powdered 
to make a traditional treatment that causes 
bruises to disappear overnight.
PREPARATION  The fresh sponge is collected in fall, 
dried, and triturated with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
People for whom Badiaga  is best suited 
enjoy mental activity, and feel that their 
minds are always clear and active, even 
when ill. Excitement or pleasure may easily 
bring on palpitations. The body may feel 
sore to the touch, as if it has been beaten, 
which may cause restless sleep; frightening 
dreams may also disturb or disrupt sleep.
Profuse mucus in the respiratory system, 
with copious catarrh that drips from the 
nose, possibly due to influenza or hay fever, 
may respond to Badiaga . Sneezing brought 
on by coughing may be helped, as may 
hard, swollen glands in the neck and breast, 
possibly linked to cancer.
Symptoms better  For heat; at night.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for stormy weather; 
for lying on the right side.
Stannum metallicum
STANNUM MET.
COMMON NAME  Tin.
ORIGIN Mined from cassiterite, which is found in 
England, Nigeria, Thailand, and South America.
BACKGROUND  Tin has long been used for 
household and commercial purposes, and  
has been used medicinally: in 18th-century 
Scotland it was taken for intestinal worms.
PREPARATION  The metal is triturated with  
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
People who benefit most from Stannum met.  are 
suspicious, anxious, uneasy , and sad, possibly 
with fixed ideas. They may be weak, debilitated, 
and unable to talk or move, and feel worse 
during the day .
Stannum met.  is used for exhaustion after 
chronic respiratory problems, or for nervous 
system disorders. It may be given for weakness 
in the chest, during or after a serious infection 
such as bronchitis or pneumonia. The  
weakness leaves the lungs and bronchi 
susceptible to inflammation or serious illness, 
including asthma.
Symptoms better  For lying across something 
hard; for expelling mucus.Symptoms worse  For lying on the right side;  
for gentle movement; for talking.
Strontium carbonicum
STRONTIUM CARB.
COMMON NAME Strontium carbonate.
ORIGIN  Found in strontianite, which  
occurs mainly in Scotland, Germany ,  
and California.
BACKGROUND  This mineral takes its name from 
Strontian, the village in Argyllshire, Scotland, 
where strontianite was discovered in 1790.
PREPARATION  Strontium carbonate is triturated 
with lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Irritable people who are prone to rage 
respond to Strontium carb.  Rage may even 
provoke violence and destructiveness in them, 
but they also tend to be forgetful, fearful, 
particularly of the dark, and easily startled. 
Although they may seem haughty , they are 
extremely sensitive to the scorn of others. 
They may start involuntarily and violently 
when asleep, waking themselves.
This remedy is given mainly for acute 
conditions following an operation or  
injury , such as fainting, exhaustion, chills, 
violent palpitations, and collapse, possibly 
due to severe trauma and bleeding. It may 
also be used to treat heart conditions, 
including angina, phlebitis (inflammation  
of a vein), and terrible pains in the muscles 
and bones.
The symptom picture for heart problems 
treated by Strontium carb.  describes a heavy , 
smothering sensation in the heart area, or dull, 
intermittent pressure in the heart.
Symptoms better  For heat; for light; for sunlight; 
for warm compresses; for a hot bath.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for loss of blood; for 
uncovering the affected area; for walking.STRONTIUM 
CARBONICUM  
(Strontianite)

168 •MINOR REMEDIES
Strychnos toxifera
CURARE
COMMON NAMES  Curare, woorali root.
ORIGIN  Found in South America.
BACKGROUND  A paralyzing poison was 
traditionally extracted by native South 
Americans from this and other Strychnos  species 
for use on arrows during hunting.
PREPARATION  The resin is extracted from the tree 
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those who respond best to Curare  tend to be 
hurried, irritable, and aggressive. They want to 
be alone and may behave maliciously toward 
others. A loss of moral judgment is also 
possible. They often have a history of self-abuse, 
perhaps involving biting or hitting themselves, 
or ripping their clothes. T ypically , they can eat 
only small amounts of food at a time.
Classic symptoms associated with Curare  
include weakness, heaviness, numbness, and 
piercing pains. Progressive muscular paralysis 
and impaired reflex action may also be  
treated by the remedy .
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For dampness; for cold  
winds; for cold weather; at 2 a.m.; for  
movement; on the right side of the body.
Sulphur iodatum
SULPHUR IOD.
COMMON NAME  Sulfur iodide.
ORIGIN  Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND  This rather unusual compound  
is rarely used in medicine other than for 
homeopathic purposes.
PREPARATION  Sulfur iodide is dissolved in  
a closed vessel, heated to 140°F (60°C),  
diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People who benefit most from Sulphur iod.  tend 
to be anxious and doubtful, and are unable to 
string coherent ideas together or to remain calm 
and composed in a working situation.
The remedy is prescribed primarily for 
chronic, itchy skin conditions such as weeping 
eczema, acne, boils, pustules, urticaria (nettle 
rash or hives), and lichen planus (pink or 
purple raised spots on the wrists, forearms, and 
lower legs). The body tends to feel cold on the 
outside, yet raw and burning hot inside, and 
symptoms tend to be worse on waking.
Symptoms better  For cool air; for winter;  
for standing.
Symptoms worse  For heat; prior to a storm; on 
waking in the morning; for the slightest exertion.Symphytum officinale
SYMPHYTUM
COMMON NAMES  Comfrey , knitbone.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe and now found in 
temperate regions worldwide.
BACKGROUND  This plant had established a 
reputation as early as the 1st century CE for 
healing bruises, sprains, fractures, and  
broken bones.
PREPARATION  The fresh root is 
gathered either before flowering  
or in the fall, steeped in  
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Symphytum ’s marked 
affinity with the 
bones in herbal 
medicine is also 
carried through to its focus in 
homeopathy . It is used to heal sprains 
and fractured or badly set bones, as well as to 
ease any pricking pain from old injuries to the 
bone, cartilage, and periosteum (the membrane 
surrounding the bone), or pain on the site of  
an amputation. Abscesses in the psoas muscle 
(which links the hip and the pelvis) and 
malignant bone tumors on the face may also be 
helped by Symphytum .
In addition, the remedy is prescribed to treat 
painful eye injuries with strange sensations—for 
example, on closing the eyelids, the eyeballs may feel raised, although there is no visible sign 
of injury . There is frequently a marked tendency 
to rub the eyes and great difficulty in opening 
the eyelids.
Symptoms better  For warmth.
Symptoms worse  For injuries; for a blow to the 
affected area; for touch or pressure on the 
affected area; for sexual excess; for movement.
T araxacum officinale
TARAXACUM
COMMON NAME  Dandelion.
ORIGIN  Grows wild in temperate climates 
worldwide, and is cultivated in France  
and Germany .
BACKGROUND  Used herbally in the traditional 
medicines of many cultures, including  
those of the West, Middle East, and China, 
dandelion is particularly well known for  
its use as a diuretic.
PREPARATION  The whole plant, including the 
root, is picked as the flowers open, chopped 
finely , and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those for whom T araxacum  is considered most 
appropriate have a tendency to be depressed 
and mutter to themselves.
Key conditions that may benefit from the 
remedy include digestive disorders, gallbladder 
inflammation, and gallstones. The classic 
symptom picture includes an enlarged, 
hardened liver, urinary problems, bilious 
attacks, cramping pains, headaches associated 
with gastric problems, and jaundiced skin. 
Acidic saliva tends to build up in the mouth, 
causing raw patches to develop on the tongue 
and a sensation of dullness in the teeth.
Symptoms better  For walking; for movement;  
for touch.
Symptoms worse  For rest; for standing; for 
sitting; for fatty foods.
T arentula cubensis syn. Mygale cubensis
TARENTULA CUB.
COMMON NAME  Cuban tarantula.
ORIGIN  Found in Cuba and the southern US, 
particularly South Carolina and Texas.
BACKGROUND  This large, hairy , dark brown spider 
has a bite that can cause blood poisoning in 
humans, with symptoms first appearing  
24 hours after being bitten.
PREPARATION The whole, live spider is steeped in 
alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People who respond to T arentula cub.  may be 
delirious, extremely restless, and uneasy . They SYMPHYTUM 
OFFICINALE  
(Comfrey)

•169 MINOR REMEDIES
often feel drowsy but sleep restlessly and have  
a sense of hurry . It is useful for hyperactivity .
The classic symptom picture for this remedy 
is of severe, painful inflammation, burning, 
stinging pains, and extreme prostration and 
weakness. It is given for slow-developing fever, 
acute infection such as diphtheria, and septic 
conditions such as carbuncles, septicemia, 
painful abscesses, especially near the fingernails, 
ulcers that will not heal, and gangrene.  
In addition, the remedy may be used to ease 
pain experienced during a slow death.  
The appetite is generally low , and the stomach 
feels hard and sore. Severe coughs such as 
whooping cough may also be helped, if there  
is great prostration.
Symptoms better  For smoking; for music.
Symptoms worse  At night; for exertion; for cold 
drinks; for touch.
Tellurium metallicum
TELLURIUM MET.
COMMON NAME  Tellurium.
ORIGIN  Found throughout the world.
BACKGROUND  Klaproth named this rare mineral in 
1798 from the Greek tellus, or “earth,” as  
a counterpart to his discovery in 1789 of 
uranium (named from the Greek ouranos ,  
or “heaven”).
PREPARATION Tellurium is triturated with  
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Tellurium met.  is most appropriate for people 
who are excitable and irritable, with  
a disposition that is sometimes described  
as “rough and angular.”
Skin disorders are the characteristic focus  
of Tellurium met. , including conditions such  
as psoriasis, ringworm, herpes, and eczema  
on the eyelids and behind the ears. A key 
symptom associated with the remedy is a 
characteristic smell of garlic in the perspiration, 
which tends to burn and irritate the skin.  
Skin symptoms are often circular or ring-
shaped, and may occur in conjunction with 
severe back pain.
The remedy may also be used for back pain 
that is typically worse for coughing, sneezing,  
or straining when passing a stool. It may help 
back pain after injury , spinal irritation, ruptured 
intervertebral disks, and pain that radiates down 
the legs. In addition, it may be effective for eye 
and ear infections, especially ear infections  
that produce a discharge that smells like  
fish brine.
Symptoms better  For lying quietly.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touch; for lying  
on the affected area.Terebinthina laricina
TEREBINTHUM
COMMON NAMES  T urpentine, turps.
ORIGIN  Resin tapped from the trunks of the  
Larix decidua  ‘Mill’ species of larch, which  
is native to Europe.
BACKGROUND  This viscous resin is used in the 
manufacture of paints. In the past it was 
used as a treatment for gonorrhea in 
traditional Western medicine.
PREPARATION  The resin is macerated in 
alcohol, before being filtered, diluted,  
and succussed.
Remedy profile
Terebinthum  is best suited to people who are 
tired, delirious, and unable to concentrate. 
Classic symptoms associated with the 
remedy include burning pain and bleeding 
of the mucous membranes, with dark, 
fetid-smelling blood. The remedy has an 
affinity with inflammation of the urinary 
tract or kidneys, accompanied by 
hemorrhaging, water retention,  
and edema in the hands and feet.  
These ailments are often associated with 
smoky-colored urine that has a strange 
smell of violets.
Symptoms better  For movement; for 
walking; for stooping.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for touch; in the 
morning; for lying on the affected area.
Teucrium marum syn. Marum verum
TEUCRIUM MARUM
COMMON NAME  Cat thyme.
ORIGIN  Native to Spain and southern 
Europe, and now found worldwide.
BACKGROUND  Cat thyme has 
traditionally been used by 
herbalists for its properties 
as an astringent and 
stimulant. It has also been 
used in the treatment  
of gallbladder and  
stomach disorders.
PREPARATION The fresh aerial 
parts without the woody 
lower branches are finely 
chopped before being 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People for whom Teucrium 
marum  is considered most 
effective tend to be oversensitive 
and feel worse for hearing or 
talking about unpleasant things, including their symptoms. They are easily 
overexcited and exhausted.
The primary affinity of this remedy is with 
polyps, which may affect the nose, ears, vagina, 
and rectum. Nasal polyps may be accompanied 
by chronic catarrh, dried-up, foul-smelling 
crusts of catarrh, and loss of smell. Fibrous 
tumors on the eyelids and fibroids in the 
uterus may be helped by the remedy , as 
may lumps in the urethra caused  
by gonorrhea.
Teucrium marum  may also be given for 
intestinal worms, involving itching and 
tingling in the anus and rectum.
Symptoms better  For open air; for perspiring.
Symptoms worse  For damp and cold; for 
changes in the weather; for the warmth of the 
bed; for evening; at night; for touching or 
rubbing the affected area.
Theridion curassavicum
THERIDION
COMMON NAME  Orange spider.
ORIGIN  Native to Curaçao and the West Indies.
BACKGROUND  This small spider has orange spots 
on its back. Its bite can cause trembling, cold 
sweats, and fainting.
PREPARATION The whole, live spider is 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Sensitivity to noise may be so extreme in 
people who respond to Theridion  that it causes 
pain and vibrations to penetrate through the 
body . There may be a feeling that time is 
passing too quickly , and a tendency to be 
chilly . Theridion  is generally used for acute 
sensitivity of the bones, nerves, and spine. The 
spine tends to be so highly sensitive that the 
least jarring motion, such as walking, may be 
unbearable; on sitting, one buttock may be 
raised off the seat to ease the pressure on the 
lower spine. There may be accompanying 
vertigo, dizziness, or motion 
sickness. Theridion  may also 
be used to treat diabetes.
Symptoms better  For warmth; 
for rest; for drinking  
warm water.
Symptoms worse  At night; for 
noise; for touch; for pressure on 
the affected area; for travel; for 
jarring movement; for closing the 
eyes; for bending forward.
See also Diabetes,  page 191 ; 
Dizziness,  page 266
TEUCRIUM MARUM  
(Cat thyme)

170 •MINOR REMEDIES
T rinitrum syn. Nitroglycerinum
GLONOINUM
COMMON NAMES  Nitroglycerine, trinitroglycerine, 
glyceryl trinitrate.
ORIGIN  Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND  An Italian chemist, Ascanio 
Sobreoro, created nitroglycerine in 1846, and 
20 years later the Swedish chemist Alfred Nobel 
used it to develop dynamite.
PREPARATION  Nitroglycerine is dissolved in 
purified water, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Symptoms that are treated with Glonoinum  
focus on the regulation of the circulation 
between the head and the heart. The remedy 
is used when an increase in blood supply 
causes hot flashes, similar to those 
experienced during heatstroke, which surge 
up to the brain in waves, resulting in severe 
headaches. There is typically a bursting, “full” 
sensation in the head, with great confusion and 
a compulsion to hold the head and squeeze it. 
Glonoinum  is also used for high blood pressure, 
particularly in the elderly , for heat exhaustion, 
and for menopausal hot flashes.
Symptoms better  For fresh air.
Symptoms worse  For heat, especially that of the 
sun; for movement such as shaking the head.
Uranium nitricum
URANIUM NIT.
COMMON NAME  Uranium nitrate.
ORIGIN  Chemically prepared.
BACKGROUND This is a compound of the 
radioactive metal uranium, which was named in 
1789 by Klaproth after the planet Uranus, since 
the element was first located soon after the 
planet’s discovery .
PREPARATION  Uranium nitrate is triturated with 
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
There is no well-defined picture for people who 
respond best to Uranium nit. , although 
irritability and depression may be evident.
Diabetes, kidney inflammation, high blood 
pressure, and liver problems can all respond to 
Uranium nit . It has an affinity with the digestive 
system and may be used for indigestion, 
bloating, and abdominal gas. Diabetes with 
water retention and increased urination may 
also be treated with this remedy .
Symptoms better  For open air; for rapid 
movement; for bathing in cold water.
Symptoms worse  For heat; for rest; for sour 
foods; for wine.
See also Diabetes,  page 191Urginea maritima var. rubra syn. Drimia 
maritima var. rubra
SQUILLA
COMMON NAMES Sea onion, sea squill.
ORIGIN  Native to the shores of the  
Mediterranean region.
BACKGROUND  The bulb of this plant is cultivated 
for the drug industry , since it contains scillarin, 
which affects the heart. Highly toxic, it has also 
been used in the manufacture of rat poison.
PREPARATION  The fresh bulb is steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Squilla  is most appropriate for people who are 
irritable, weak, and weary . They tend to sleep 
badly , and definitely prefer to sit up rather than 
lie down.
This is a slow-acting remedy , used for 
conditions that take several days to develop. It 
can be used for chronic bronchitis in the elderly , 
or for childhood measles, but its primary use is 
for chronic respiratory conditions, including 
bronchitis, pleurisy , coughs, and asthma with 
panting. Squilla  is typically prescribed for 
symptoms such as a dry , loose, short, violent 
cough that comes from deep in the lungs, sharp 
pain in the lower left side of the chest, and 
involuntary passing of urine.
Symptoms better  For rest; for sitting up; for 
coughing up even a small quantity of mucus.
Symptoms worse  In the early morning;  
for movement.
Urtica urens
URTICA URENS
COMMON NAME  Annual nettle.
ORIGIN  Found wild in temperate regions 
throughout the world.
BACKGROUND  In the 1st century CE the ancient 
Greek physician Dioscorides advocated this 
nettle and its relative, Urtica dioica , as a 
treatment for festering wounds, nosebleeds,  
and delayed menstruation. The plant has a long 
tradition of use for many ailments in Western 
herbalism, and is still highly valued today .
PREPARATION  The whole flowering plant, 
including the root, is steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Appropriately , urticaria (nettle rash or hives) is  
a key condition treated by Urtica urens.  It is 
given for red, burning, stinging skin eruptions 
that may be swollen or itchy . Symptoms are 
often aggravated by warmth, bathing, and 
vigorous exercise. Itching tends to be worse on 
rising in the morning, perhaps causing a fear of 
going to bed at night. Urtica urens  is also used 
for actual burns or scalds with classic redness and blistering, and for blistering, burning, 
stinging, red, allergic rashes caused by insect 
bites, stings, shellfish, and plants.
Symptoms better  For rubbing the affected area; 
for lying down.
Symptoms worse  For warmth; during a snowfall; 
for bathing in cold water; at the same time each 
year; for touch; after childbirth.
See also Urticaria (hives),  page 242
Ustilago zeae
USTILAGO
COMMON NAME  Corn smut.
ORIGIN  Found as a fungus on corn, especially in 
Central and South America.
BACKGROUND  The Zuni Indians of New Mexico 
traditionally used corn smut to hasten labor and 
prevent uterine bleeding.
PREPARATION  The ripe, fresh fungus is macerated 
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
This remedy is best suited to people who tend 
to be irritable and sad. It is used for women’s 
problems such as uterine fibroids, or 
hemorrhaging that develops following 
miscarriage or labor. The characteristic symptom 
picture is of slow , congestive bleeding, with clots 
that sometimes form long strings. Ovarian and 
pelvic pain is often on the left side.
Symptoms better  For rest.
Symptoms worse  For touch; for movement; for 
menopause.
URTICA URENS  
(Annual nettle)

•171 MINOR REMEDIES
Valeriana officinalis
VALERIANA
COMMON NAME  Common valerian.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe and northern Asia, 
and cultivated in central Europe.
BACKGROUND  Once known as “all-heal,” 
valerian has been used since the time  
of ancient Rome for anxiety , insomnia,  
and high blood pressure. In World  
War I the tincture was widely used  
for shell shock.
PREPARATION  The fresh root is unearthed and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Those with a nervous, irritable, restless,  
and mentally or emotionally unstable state  
of mind respond best to Valeriana . It is  
used for an extreme nervous state possibly 
characterized by hysteria, raving, swearing, 
and madness, accompanied by a sensation  
of dreaming or floating. Fluctuating mood 
swings that alternate between extreme joy 
and deepest grief are typically linked  
to this remedy .
Physically , Valeriana  is associated with 
neuralgic pains, a rapid pulse, and blood 
congestion in the head. Pains tend to be 
darting and tearing, alternating between  
the upper and lower limbs. The limbs feel 
painful, heavy , and difficult to move, and 
may jerk on resting. Headaches tend to 
develop slowly , in spurts, or suddenly ,  
as if caused by a blow to the head.
Symptoms better  For changing position;  
for walking around; for sleep; for sweating.
Symptoms worse  In the early afternoon;  
in the late evening; at rest; for standing  
or sitting still; for excitement; for fasting.
Veratrum viride
VERATRUM VIR.
COMMON NAME  American white hellebore.
ORIGIN  Found throughout northwestern  
North America.
BACKGROUND Although once used as a herbal 
remedy by the Iroquois and Cherokee 
Indians, this highly toxic plant is now little 
used in herbal medicine.
PREPARATION  The fresh root is gathered in fall 
and macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond best to this remedy  
are often restless, quarrelsome, and prone  
to complaining.
Veratrum vir.  has a strong affinity with lung 
conditions such as asthma, pleurisy , and pneumonia. Symptoms appear rapidly , 
including a strong or slow pulse, high fever, 
anxiety , and vomiting. There may be a red 
streak in the center of the tongue.
Another rapid-onset condition for which 
Veratrum vir.  is given is intense fever with 
twitching, especially during sleep, spasms, 
delirium, chorea (involuntary , random, jerky 
movements), or even manic behavior or 
puerperal fever (infection in the genital tract 
after miscarriage, an abortion, or childbirth). 
Violent, rapidly appearing headaches 
may occur, with a bursting, 
congested sensation in the head,  
as if it contains too much blood.
Symptoms better  For rubbing the affected  
area; for lying with the head held low; for hot,  
strong coffee.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for the heat of  
the sun; for rising; for movement; for lying  
on the back; after childbirth; for suppressed 
menstruation, possibly caused by jet lag.
Verbascum thapsiforme
VERBASCUM
COMMON NAMES  Great mullein, Aaron’s rod.
ORIGIN  Native to central and southern Europe 
and western Asia.
BACKGROUND  Greek mythology relates that 
Odysseus used great mullein to protect  
himself from Circe, and in the Middle Ages  
it was thought to be magical. Today it is 
generally used in herbalism for coughs.
PREPARATION  The fresh aerial parts in flower, 
excluding the woody parts, are finely 
chopped and steeped in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Verbascum  is of most benefit to those who 
are apathetic, lazy , and easily distracted by 
the varied thoughts that crowd upon them. 
The symptoms treated by Verbascum  are 
often associated with painful neuralgic 
conditions, particularly of the facial area. 
T ypical symptoms include neuralgic pains in 
the face and teeth, especially on the left side, 
with severe pain in the cheekbones. 
Irritation and inflammation of the bladder, 
ears, or respiratory tract may also be eased 
by the remedy .
In addition, Verbascum  is given for painful 
colds with profuse discharge, watery eyes, 
and a sensation of the ears having been 
blocked up. The chest may be congested 
with catarrh, and the voice may be deep and 
hoarse. Coughs tend to sound hollow, deep, 
and hoarse, and occur mainly at night. An 
intake of breath may cause the coughing to 
die down.Symptoms better  For rising from sitting; for 
taking a deep breath.
Symptoms worse  For drafts; for changes in 
temperature; for touch; for talking or reading 
aloud; for biting hard.
See also Neuralgia,  page 268
Vespa crabro
VESPA
COMMON NAME  European hornet.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe.
BACKGROUND  The female hornet has a severe 
sting, but it is rarely fatal.
PREPARATION  The whole, live insect is steeped 
in alcohol, diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
People for whom Vespa  is best suited  
are prone to insomnia, often due to  
anxiety . Their nerves and muscles  
are often sensitive.
Red, swollen skin complaints and 
disorders of the female reproductive organs 
are usually treated with Vespa . T ypical skin 
symptoms include sore, stinging boils, 
raised, itchy bumps and weals, and itchy , 
lentil-shaped spots. Stinging, burning  
pains, as if the body is being pierced by 
something sharp, are another symptom 
associated with this remedy .
Vespa  is also used for mucous  
membrane problems and complaints 
associated with menstruation, such  
as premenstrual depression, pain,  
and constipation.
Symptoms better  For washing the hands in 
cold water; for bathing the affected area  
with vinegar.
Symptoms worse  For closed, stuffy 
surroundings; for being by a source of  
direct heat.VESPA CRABRO  
(European hornet)

172 •MINOR REMEDIES
Vetiveria zizianoides
ANANTHERUM
COMMON NAMES  Cuscus grass, vetiver.
ORIGIN  Native to tropical Asia, and commonly 
found in India and Sri Lanka.
BACKGROUND  In India and Sri Lanka this grass’s 
oil is called “the oil of tranquility ,” and its heavy , 
earthy aroma is used to repel flies, cockroaches, 
bed bugs, and moths.
PREPARATION  The dried root is steeped in alcohol, 
diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Anantherum  is best suited to people who seem 
overexcited or even drunk. Their behavior may 
be restless and manic.
The remedy is typically prescribed for skin 
disorders, and for hard, glandular swellings, 
especially in the neck. It is used for itchy skin 
eruptions, notably on the scalp and eyebrows, 
and particularly if accompanied by herpes or 
warty growths. Anantherum  may also be given to 
ease neuralgic headaches with a sensation of the 
facial bones being crushed.
Symptoms better  A few hours after  
drinking coffee.
Symptoms worse  For movement; immediately 
after drinking coffee.
Viburnum opulus
VIBURNUM
COMMON NAMES  Cramp bark, guelder rose, bark 
elder, highbush cranberry .
ORIGIN  Grows wild in Europe and eastern  
North America.
BACKGROUND  Native American tribes such as  
the Meskwaki and the Penobscot used this plant 
to treat cramps, swollen glands, and mumps.
PREPARATION  The fresh, young bark is collected 
in fall, chopped finely , and macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Specifically a women’s remedy , Viburnum  best 
suits those who feel depressed, stupid, and 
disoriented, and are unable to decide where 
they are or what they should do.
The classic symptom picture for this  
remedy is of uterine problems, including  
painful menstruation, false labor, pains 
following labor, threatened abortion, and 
recurrent miscarriage. Menstrual pain may  
be so severe that it feels as if breathing  
and the heartbeat will stop. Pain extends  
into the thighs.
Symptoms better  For open air; for rest;  
for pressure on the affected area;  
for moving around.Symptoms worse  In the evening; at night; during 
a snowfall; before menstruation; for fright;  
for jarring.
Vinca minor
VINCA
COMMON NAME Lesser periwinkle.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe.
BACKGROUND Lesser periwinkle was traditionally 
known as the “flower of death” by Italians, who 
placed it on the coffins of dead children.
PREPARATION  The whole, fresh plant, including 
the root, is finely chopped and macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Vinca  is most suitable for people who seem  
sad, weepy , weak, and faint. They may have an 
empty , hungry sensation, and possibly a feeling 
that they are going to die.
Skin problems such as eczema are key 
conditions treated by this remedy . It is used  
for weeping eczema that is infected with thick, 
foul-smelling crusts, for itchy , burning skin, for 
a warm scalp with foul-smelling eruptions and 
corrosive itching, for cradle cap, and for burning 
leg ulcers. Vinca  is also given for excessive 
menstrual flow that causes great weakness.
Symptoms better  For moving in the open air.
Symptoms worse  For anger; for walking; for 
stooping; for swallowing.
Viola tricolor
VIOLA TRI.
COMMON NAMES  Heartsease, wild pansy .
ORIGIN  Native to Europe, north  
Africa, and parts of Asia.
BACKGROUND  Heartsease is a member of the violet 
family , long renowned as a “purifier” and used 
as a treatment for eczema and itching.
PREPARATION  The fresh aerial parts in flower are 
chopped and steeped in alcohol.Remedy profile
Viola tri.  is best suited to those who feel 
discontented and capricious, and to children 
who are prone to disobedience.
Obstinate skin problems are typically 
treated with Viola tri . These include impetigo, 
rashes, eczema, rosacea, and pustular 
eruptions. The typical symptom picture is of 
intolerable itching and burning, especially at 
night. The skin does not heal easily , and is 
prone to thick scabs, which may crack and 
discharge yellow pus or fluid.
Viola tri.  is particularly suited to skin 
symptoms in conjunction with urinary 
problems. T ypical urinary symptoms may 
include cloudy , foul-smelling urine (like  
the urine of a cat), frequent, profuse 
urination, bedwetting at night, and sharp 
pains in the urethra.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; in winter;  
for movement.
See also Rosacea,  page 193
Vipera berus
VIPERA
COMMON NAMES  European adder, viper.
ORIGIN  Widely distributed in Europe and Asia.
BACKGROUND  Dark gray with black zigzags on its 
back, the adder has hollow fangs in the upper 
jaw for injecting venom.
PREPARATION The fresh venom is triturated with 
lactose sugar.
Remedy profile
Vipera  is best suited to people with a rather 
dizzy , even delirious, state of mind. It is also 
associated with slow-developing children, and 
people who age prematurely .
Key symptoms associated with Vipera  include 
inflammation and swelling of the veins, typically 
accompanied by faintness and collapse. The 
remedy is commonly used for recurrent 
nosebleeds, varicose veins, or phlebitis 
(inflammation of a vein).
Symptoms better  For raising the affected limbs.
Symptoms worse  For cold; for changes in the 
weather; for touch; for letting the affected limbs 
hang down; at the same time each year.
Viscum album
VISCUM ALB.
COMMON NAME  Mistletoe.
ORIGIN  Native to Europe and northern Asia, and 
found growing as a parasite on host trees such 
as oak and apple.
BACKGROUND  Revered in Nordic and Druidic 
legend, this plant has long been used in herbal VIOLA TRICOLOR  
(Heartsease)

•173 MINOR REMEDIES
medicine and is currently being researched as a 
treatment for cancer.
PREPARATION  The fresh, leafy shoots and berries 
are harvested in fall, chopped finely , and 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
Fear and detachment from others is typical 
in those for whom Viscum alb . is most 
appropriate. They seem to dream constantly, 
both when awake and asleep, and may talk 
incoherently. They may be alternately cold 
and hot.
The classic symptom picture for Viscum 
alb. is of seizures, tremors, or epilepsy, 
tearing joint and neuralgic pains, and 
asthma. It is prescribed for generalized 
tremors, uncontrollable jerking after a 
fright, seizures, including “absences,” petit 
mal, chorea, and epilepsy that begins as a 
glow radiating from the head to the feet. 
Attacks may be 
accompanied by 
breathing difficulties or 
asthma, and followed by 
persistent dizziness and by twitching of the 
body that causes insomnia.
Neuralgic pains usually treated with Viscum 
alb. include headaches with a numb, tightening 
sensation and throbbing in the top of the head, 
as though the skull is being lifted off the body . 
Headaches are sometimes accompanied by eye 
pains, difficulty in opening the eyelids, and 
crackling noises or deafness in the ears.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For winter; for cold, stormy 
weather; for becoming chilled when hot;  
for movement.
Vitex agnus-castus
AGNUS CASTUS
COMMON NAMES  Agnus castus, chaste tree, 
monk’s pepper, wild lavender.
ORIGIN  Native to the Mediterranean region  
and western Asia.
BACKGROUND  As the name “chaste tree”  
suggests, this plant was once thought to lower 
the libido. It was often chewed by monks, and in Italy blossoms are still strewn in the path  
of novices entering a convent.
PREPARATION  The dried, ripe berries are 
macerated in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who respond well to this remedy  
may be anxious about their health, especially 
their sexual health, and may have a strong 
presentiment of their own death.
Agnus castus  is given chiefly to people 
with low energy levels, depression, poor 
sexual vitality, and a low libido. It is helpful 
for fatigue due to menopause, or caused by 
alcohol or drug abuse, or following 
excessive amounts of sexual intercourse.  
In men, the remedy is generally prescribed 
for sexual conditions such as impotence, 
premature ejaculation with sexual arousal, 
or disinterest, particularly in men who 
formerly had a high libido. In women,  
Agnus castus  may help where there is a loss 
of libido, especially during menopause, 
scanty or excessively heavy menstruation, 
or an enlarged uterus, possibly with a 
staining vaginal discharge. Postpartum 
depression and a lack of breast milk 
following childbirth may also be helped  
by the remedy.
Symptoms better  For scratching or pressing on 
the affected area.
Symptoms worse  For sexual excess;  
for ejaculating.
See also Erectile  
dysfunction,  page 264Wyethia helenoides syn. Alarconia helenoides
WYETHIA
COMMON NAMES Poison weed, California  
compass plant.
ORIGIN  Native to North America.
BACKGROUND  This plant takes its Latin name 
from N. B. Wyeth, the naturalist who first 
discovered it in the mountains of North America.
PREPARATION  The fresh root is steeped in alcohol, 
diluted, and succussed.
Remedy profile
Uneasy , nervous behavior is typical of people 
who respond best to Wyethia . They may expect 
a calamity to befall them.
The classic symptom picture for Wyethia  is  
of hay fever with violent sneezing, dryness, and 
itching in the ears, palate, and the back of the 
nose, and a scalding sensation in the mouth. 
There is often a great urge to rub the palate with 
the tongue to relieve the itching.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  In the afternoon; for 
movement; for exercise that raises a sweat;  
for eating.
See also Allergies,  page 206
Zingiber officinale
ZINGIBER
COMMON NAME  Ginger.
ORIGIN  Native to southern Asia and grown 
throughout the tropics.
BACKGROUND  Ginger has played a major 
medicinal and culinary role in many 
cultures for millennia, and is highly valued, 
especially for relieving indigestion and 
nausea and stimulating the circulation.
PREPARATION  The rhizome is dried and stripped 
of its outer layer, before being macerated  
in alcohol.
Remedy profile
People who benefit most from Zingiber  are 
cheerful even when in great pain. They are 
nervous and fidgety, and often restless at 
night, despite being sleepy.
Digestive disorders are chiefly associated 
with Zingiber . T ypical symptoms treated 
include nausea, vomiting, and colicky pain 
in the abdomen, with chronic excess mucus 
production in the intestine. The remedy  
is also prescribed for asthma that is  
marked by a total absence of any 
accompanying anxiety.
Symptoms better  None known.
Symptoms worse  For cold air; for uncovering the 
body; for touch; for lying; for movement; for 
bread; for melons.VISCUM ALBUM  
(Mistletoe)
VITEX  
AGNUS-CASTUS  
(Agnus castus)



serious  
ailments

176 •
CONSULTING A PRACTITIONER
An interview with a homeopathic practitioner will be likely 
longer than a conventional medical consultation,  
and often involves a series of follow-up visits several weeks 
apart, especially if a long-term condition is being treated. 
This allows the progress of an ailment to be carefully SERIOUS AILMENTS
Homeopaths believe that a person’s state of 
health reflects the level of their inner vitality  
at the time, and that good health is defined  
as freedom from illness combined with general 
physical and emotional well-being. Homeopaths 
also consider that certain health problems 
develop from an acquired or inherited “root,” 
and that a person has a tendency to become ill 
in a particular way—his or her susceptibility  
(see page 18) . According to homeopathic theory , 
illness results from imbalances in body systems, 
which have a great capacity for self-healing.  
This can be stimulated and nurtured by 
homeopathic treatment.  Homeopathy presupposes that the human 
body is always adjusting positively to 
maintain a healthy balance  (see page 18) , and 
has a compulsion to flourish. If that balance 
is threatened—from outside or within—the 
body tries to reestablish it, and symptoms  
of an ailment are manifested as it does so. 
Symptoms develop as the body responds to 
the stress of illness, and a person’s physical 
and mental resources are temporarily 
redeployed in order to deal with the illness.
Profiling patients
Many factors constitute a whole person,  
so all sorts of information are needed in  
order to build up a profile of a patient before 
“constitutional” homeopathic treatment can 
be prescribed. Despite the individualistic 
nature of homeopathic assessment and 
treatment, many people can be grouped 
according to “type.” T ypes are described in 
terms of physical attributes as well as mental 
and emotional traits. People of a particular 
type very often have the same habits, develop 
the same likes and dislikes, and may well 
share a susceptibility to particular ailments.
Searching for clues
First and foremost, a homeopathic practitioner 
requires a full description of a patient’s 
symptoms, how they have evolved since  
onset, and what makes them better or worse. 
The choice of remedy will ultimately be based 
on the law of similars, which states that “like 
cures like”  (see page 18) . A person’s symptoms 
are seen as reliable clues to the most suitable 
remedy to activate the self-healing powers of  
the individual’s “vital force.” Characteristics of 
bodily functions and functional disturbances  
are also noted. So, for instance, someone might 
be prone to indigestion, which manifests itself  
as heartburn when certain foods are eaten.
Also of interest to a homeopathic practitioner 
are a person’s medical history , including details 
of pharmaceutical medications, other 
treatments, and family medical history . This When taking a homeopathic remedy, observe 
the following “rules” in order to ensure that 
it has the best chance of working effectively.
• Do not eat for 30 minutes before taking 
a homeopathic remedy, so that it enters 
the system on its own.
• Do not eat for 30 minutes after taking  
a remedy so as not to inhibit absorption.
• Avoid strong foods and drinks, such 
as spicy foods and alcohol, that affect 
body systems, or consume them only in 
moderation. Some, such as coffee, may 
actually counteract the remedy.
• Avoid using strong substances, such as 
household cleaning products, that might 
have a poisoning effect on the body.
• Avoid medicinal substances and certain 
products, such as some essential 
oils, so that a remedy can get to work 
on its own. If in doubt, consult your 
homeopathic practitioner.
• Do not touch or handle a remedy; use a 
clean, dry spoon to drop it into the mouth. 
If tablets are touched or dropped, they 
should not be returned to the container.
• Store homeopathic remedies properly 
(see page 271 ). Make sure that the tops 
are securely in place before storage.MAXIMIZING EFFECTSinformation may reveal significant evidence  
of both genetic tendency and susceptibility .
Describing personality
A homeopathic practitioner will then ask  
a person to describe themselves in terms  
of basic temperament, moods, feelings,  
and beliefs. This will include temporary 
psychological factors associated with their 
physical symptoms, such as irritability or  
an aversion to sympathy . Of significance are 
details about any emotional traumas—from 
deep-seated, childhood experiences to events 
of the recent past, such as bereavement. 
Details such as how the weather, seasons, and 
times of day affect the individual, personal 
likes and dislikes, and in particular objects  
of fear, are all important in building up  
a complete picture of that person.
Looking at lifestyle
Finally , general features of a person’s lifestyle 
are considered. Dietary factors of significance 
include food preferences and aversions, and 
potential sources of irritation or digestive 
upset. Stress levels are also significant.
Collating information
Much disparate information is collected during 
a consultation. Examinations and tests are 
carried out on physical symptoms as necessary . 
Practitioners draw on their experiences of 
similar symptom pictures and personality types, 
and compare the information they have with 
that in a homeopathic repertory , which lists 
symptoms, remedies, and provings.
Prescribing individually
Given the highly individualistic nature of 
homeopathic prescription, two people are 
unlikely to be prescribed the same remedy , 
even if their symptoms are identical. For the 
same reason, they may find that their 
remedies do not match any of the general 
profiles of remedies listed for their ailment in 
popular homeopathic source books.Amassing informationmonitored and subtle changes noted. At the initial 
appointment, a person’s current state of health and previous 
medical history will form the basis of a complete health, 
personality, and lifestyle profile as the foundation of 
homeopathic prescription.

•177 SERIOUS AILMENTS
PHYSICAL WELL-BEING
• General symptoms and ailments: onset of symptoms, 
and what affects them and how.
• Weight, shape, and physical condition.
• Diet: nutritional balance, food preferences and 
aversions, food intolerances, and any special 
requirements or dietary deﬁciencies.
• Energy levels.
• Sleep: amount and quality, effects of sleep deprivation, 
and dreams.
• Risks to health: smoking, consumption of alcohol and 
recreational drugs, or dangerous jobs or pastimes.
• Time out: relaxation and leisure activities.
• Knowledge of what to do if ill or injured.
MEDICAL HISTORY
• Personal medical history: past injuries and 
illnesses, conventional drug prescriptions, and any 
complementary treatments.
• Family medical history: incidence in family members  
of conditions such as heart disease, diabetes, mental 
health problems, or cancer.
• Inherited susceptibilities: allergies or tendency to 
contract certain illnesses.
• Diet: susceptibility to cholesterol-related illness, 
obesity, or food intolerances.
• Awareness of symptoms of genetically inherited 
disease and preventative measures.
• Checkups: self-examination, medical tests, or screening.
ENVIRONMENT
• Climate: effects of seasonal changes and day-to-day 
weather patterns.
• Access to and appreciation of fresh air.
• Exposure to sun and awareness of risks.
• Effects of pollution: air, water, and noise.
• Work environment: ofﬁce ergonomics, noise levels, 
amount of personal space, and impact of heating or 
air-conditioning systems.
• Home environment: particular allergic responses to 
household products or toiletries, pollen, animals, 
tobacco smoke, or air pollution.
• Daily routine: stress and other effects of commuting, 
working in an ofﬁce in an urban environment, and 
working long hours.PERSONALITY
• Temperament: positive or negative, passive or 
assertive, relaxed or anxious.
• Self-image and self-worth.
• Emotions: ability to express and control feelings, laugh, 
and deal with negative emotions.
• Relationships: sensitivity to others, ability to resolve 
conﬂict, desire for approval, and sex drive.
• Any feelings of guilt, insecurity, and degree of control 
over personal destiny.
• Ability to cope under stress.
• Fears.
• Opportunities for creative expression.
• Spirituality, deeply held beliefs, and motivation.
LIFE EVENTS
• Childhood trauma: impact of death or other loss  
of a parent, or physical or mental abuse.
• Family circumstances: effects of births, marriage, 
separation, divorce, death, bullying, exams, children 
leaving home, or caring for disabled or elderly relatives.
• Proximity of family and friends.
• Ability to deal with serious health problems.
• Property: effects of buying and selling homes, moving, 
or making extensive alterations.
• Work experience: impact of new job, loss of job, 
redundancy, retirement, job relocation, overwork,  
or juggling work and family.
• Financial or legal problems.
LIFE MANAGEMENT
• Time management: ability to set realistic goals, plan 
and organize projects, cope with deadlines, and 
delegate tasks.
• Success in maintaining a balance between work and 
play, and between work and family.
• Stress management: opportunities to relax, and ability 
to control stressful situations and to turn problems  
into opportunities.
• Work: ability to rationalize workload, deal with physical 
strains, or improve working environment.
• Routines developed in order to give structure to the 
working day and home life.
• Financial planning and organization. BODY MINDAs the basis of homeopathic assessment, a practitioner collects a wealth of information about a patient’s physical 
condition, mental and emotional states, and life in general  (see below) . An individual’s unique adaptations to their 
surroundings and their idiosyncratic ways are accepted and respected for making an individual what they are. A person 
is regarded as the product of their physical and mental well-being or ill health, genetic inheritance, and daily experience.ASSESSING A PATIENT

178 •
The central nervous system—the brain and 
spinal cord—receives information from all 
over the body . This information takes  
the form of electrical impulses that are 
transmitted along a nerve network—the 
peripheral nervous system—which branches 
off the central nervous system. The brain then 
sends out instructions to internal organs, 
muscles, glands, and tissues throughout the 
body via the peripheral nervous system.
In terms of function, the parts of the 
nervous system consisting of nerves that 
control the muscles involved in voluntary 
actions are known as the somatic nervous 
system. Nerves concerned with the 
unconscious control of bodily functions  
such as digestion, gland secretions, and 
temperature regulation are part of the 
autonomic nervous system.
How nerves function
A nerve is made up of strings of nerve cells, 
or neurons, which are the basic units of the 
nervous system. Some nerves carry 
instructions from the brain or spinal cord to 
muscles, glands, or other tissues throughout 
the body . Others carry information to the 
brain from sensory receptors, sensory organs 
such as the eyes and ears, and internal 
organs. Each nerve cell  (see right)  has parts 
that receive electrical messages from other 
nerve cells, and parts that transmit messages 
to nerve cells or other tissues. The cell bodies 
of neurons make up the gray matter of the 
brain and spinal cord, while the long nerve 
fibers, or axons, make up the white matter of 
the central nervous system.
All but the smallest nerve fibers are 
insulated and protected by a fatty substance 
called myelin, which also helps to conduct 
nerve impulses quickly along the fibers. 
Multiple sclerosis is believed to occur 
because the myelin becomes damaged in 
some way . The brain and spinal column are 
protected by delicate membranes  
called meninges.SERIOUS AILMENTS
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The nervous system is the human body’s central command center. It receives 
and evaluates stimuli from inside and outside the body , and issues directives  
to tissues and organs in response to these stimuli. It consists of the central 
nervous system and the peripheral nervous system.
How the system works
NETWORK OF NERVES Nerves extend 
to all parts of the body in a vast and 
complex network. The peripheral 
nervous system spreads out from  
12 pairs of cranial nerves, which are 
connected to the brain, and 31 pairs  
of spinal nerves, which are connected 
to the spinal column. Peripheral 
nerves branch and divide so that  
all organs, tissues, and farthest 
reaches of the limbs  
are contacted.Spinal cord
Nerves leave 
spinal cord 
through bony 
outlets between 
vertebrae
Femoral nerve
Sciatic  
nerve
Tibial nerveTerminal fibers  
at end of nerve 
fiber transmit 
nerve impulses 
to other nerves
Schwann cell maintains each 
section of myelin sheath
Cell body consists 
of nucleus and 
several branching 
dendrites
Nerve fiber is 
surrounded by 
protective 
myelin sheath
STRUCTURE OF A NERVE CELL A nerve cell, 
or neuron, has a cell body, and  
a long nerve fiber, or axon. Dendrites 
receive nerve impulses from other nerve 
cells. Impulses are carried away from the 
cell body by the nerve fibers, and can 
travel at speeds of up to 300 miles  
(500 km) an hour.Radial nerve
Median  
nerveAxillary 
nerve

•179
Symptoms
• Possible tingling, numbness, or weakness 
affecting a hand, foot, or a whole side of  
the body .
• Double vision or the misting or blurring  
of vision.
• Possible heaviness, weakness, or constricted 
feeling in the hands and feet.
• Possible strong muscle spasms, constipation, 
ulceration of the skin, and mood swings.
• In more serious cases, possible paralysis and 
incontinence, which may be associated with 
fatigue, vertigo, giddiness, clumsiness, muscle 
weakness, slurred speech, and difficulty  
in walking.
Causes
The causes of multiple sclerosis are unknown. 
There may be a genetic tendency , but the fact 
that the disease is five times more common in 
temperate zones than in the tropics suggests a 
viral cause. It may be an autoimmune disease, 
whereby the body’ s immune system attacks the 
myelin, gradually leading to damage of the 
underlying nerve fibers. Sensitivity to toxic 
metals or to vaccines has also been postulated  
as a cause.
Conventional care
Diagnosis is aided by evoked response tests 
on the eyes (measuring the speed of optic 
nerve impulses), and magnetic resonance 
imagery (MRI), which can reveal damage  
to the white matter of the nervous system. 
Conventional treatment of multiple  
sclerosis includes sunflower or evening-
primrose oil, interferon (protein produced 
by the body to fight infection and cultured 
from human cells or synthesized in the 
laboratory), and potent drugs such as 
corticosteroids. An amino acid, 
phenylalanine, is believed to be beneficial, 
as well as vitamin B, and low doses  
of antidepressant drugs. Controversy 
surrounds the use of marijuana to relieve 
muscle spasms. Physiotherapy may help 
those affected by multiple sclerosis.Homeopathic medicine
Homeopathic treatment is largely constitutional 
after study of the patient’s history . This includes 
emotional factors and, especially in multiple 
sclerosis, any long-suppressed problems from 
childhood. Homeopathy attributes this 
condition to an inherent weakness of the 
nervous system that is aggravated by trauma, 
infection, or the effects of toxic metals.
Constitutional prescription will mainly 
depend upon the individual’s symptoms  (see 
page 18) , but some remedies have an affinity 
with the nervous system. Argentum nit.  has a 
direct, qualitative effect upon nerves controlling 
conscious movement; while Causticum  is 
indicated for the progressive debilitation of the 
nervous system. Nat. mur .  is prescribed for 
problems in the brain and spinal cord that 
produce tingling, weakness, and eventual 
numbness in the fingers, hands, and arms. 
Other constitutional remedies include Lachesis , 
Phosphorus , and Plumbum met .
Remedies for the relief of specific symptoms 
include Phosphorus , if there is frequent fainting; 
T arentula , for jerky movements of the hands, 
feet, and tongue; and Agaricus , for weak, shaky 
movements accompanied by shooting pains.
Lifestyle
A diet that is low in animal fats, gluten-free, and 
high in gamma-linoleic acid (found in sunflower 
seeds and oil) may be beneficial, while caffeine 
is best avoided. Regular exercise and rest are 
important. A daily routine might include three 
rest periods of 10–20 minutes each and fairly 
vigorous exercise such as weight-lifting, which 
should be built up very gradually .NERVOUS SYSTEM
This condition occurs if the myelin sheaths surrounding nerve fibers are damaged. 
In temperate regions of the world, multiple sclerosis affects one in a thousand 
people, and more women than men. There may be just a single attack, or repeated 
attacks that lead to increasing disability . Only in a minority of cases, however, is 
the condition crippling.MULTIPLE SCLEROSISCASE HISTORY
Christine was a 39-year-old homemaker. 
Eight years before her homeopathic 
consultation, she had noticed that her right 
foot dragged because of weakness in the 
leg. Multiple sclerosis was diagnosed six 
years later, when she began to suffer blurred 
vision and a frequent urge to urinate. She 
was taking phenylalanine and vitamin and 
mineral supplements.
PERSONAL DETAILS
A pleasant, mild-mannered woman on the 
surface, Christine admitted to anger and a 
deep sense of injustice. She had a tendency 
to feel resentful and lose her temper. She 
lacked conﬁdence, was depressed about her 
illness deteriorating, and feared the future. 
Her mother had died when Christine  
was eight.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Christine had a great desire for coffee and  
a strong dislike of whiskey. She liked most 
foods, especially sweet foods, salt, vinegar, 
and spices, but she disliked fats.
GENERAL DETAILS
Christine felt worse in cold and wet weather, 
in great heat, and in the late afternoon, but 
she felt better for warmth. Her symptoms 
worsened if she was overtired or thought  
too much about her illness. She woke 
unrefreshed from sleep.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Christine was given a low potency of Nat. 
mur., and advised to write to her dead 
mother to unburden her suppressed grief. 
The remedy was repeated twice in a higher 
potency, along with advice about rest, 
exercise, and additional mineral and vitamin 
supplements, but her condition deteriorated. 
Lathyrus  failed to help. Allergy tests proved 
negative, but her mercury levels were low.  
A digestive problem was suspected. Herbal 
and homeopathic remedies improved her 
bowel function, but the multiple sclerosis 
worsened. Phosphorus  failed to help, and 
Christine was desperate. She was then 
prescribed Causticum  on the basis of her 
oversensitivity to people. Her condition 
improved immediately. High-potency 
Causticum,  with physiotherapy for her 
abnormal gait, has sustained  
the improvement.CAUTION
• If, despite all treatment, the condition 
continues to deteriorate, consult a doctor.
• If a person affected by multiple sclerosis 
undergoes psychological or physical trauma, 
homeopathic remedies taken as a 
preventative measure may preempt an attack.Spinal cord

180 •
The breathing process is controlled by the 
respiratory center of the brain. The purpose  
of respiration is to obtain oxygen, which is then 
transported around the body in the blood. It 
ends up in body cells, where it combines with 
glucose to produce energy . Carbon dioxide is  
a by-product of this process, and is expelled on 
breathing out. Breathing is an automatic process: 
it cannot be stopped voluntarily , although its 
rate and depth can be controlled. An adult 
human takes between 13 and 80 breaths a 
minute, depending on the degree of exertion.
Breathing in and out
Air flows in and out of the lungs because  
the pressure of air in the chest is constantly 
changing in relation to the pressure of air 
outside the body . During inhalation, the 
diaphragm contracts and descends while the rib 
cage rises and expands. The decrease in pressure 
in the lungs draws air in. The opposite occurs 
during exhalation as the diaphragm rises and 
the ribs fall. This increases the pressure in the 
lungs and air flows out.
Respiratory problems
The walls of the airway produce mucus that 
keeps air moist and warm. The surface of the 
walls is lined with tiny hairs, which move  
rather like fields of wheat. They help to move 
dust and foreign bodies away from the lungs  
to be coughed up or sneezed out of the airway . 
If particles are not removed—as in the case of 
smokers, in whom the hairs become paralyzed 
by nicotine—they remain in the lung. This 
encourages viruses and bacteria to create 
infection, and excessive amounts of mucus  
to be produced. Small airways and alveoli   
(see right)  may become flooded with mucus, 
with the result that respiration deteriorates,  
and gas exchange fails. This occurs in 
pneumonia. Certain irritants may cause  
spasms of the airway , as in asthma.SERIOUS AILMENTS
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The respiratory system runs from the tip of the nose to the smallest air sac deep in 
each lung. It shares a common passageway with the digestive tract as far as the larynx. 
The purpose of the respiratory system is to transport oxygen to the lungs, where it is 
absorbed into the blood. This then carries the oxygen to cells throughout the  
body , where it is used to produce energy . Carbon dioxide, a by-product  
of the process, is taken back to the lungs and expelled.
How the system works
WHERE GASES ARE EXCHANGED  The 
lungs’ branching bronchi feed into tiny 
respiratory bronchioles and ultimately  
the alveoli, small balloonlike sacs. Oxygen 
diffuses through the walls of the alveoli 
into a network of capillaries, and then  
into the bloodstream. Carbon dioxide 
diffuses from the blood vessels into  
the alveoli to be exhaled from the lungs.Upper pharynx allows passage 
of air; lower pharynx, air,  
foods, and fluids
Larynx separates pharynx 
from trachea, or windpipe
Lungs are enclosed 
by thin membranes 
called pleurae
Diaphragm separates 
chest cavity from 
abdominal cavityAbdominal muscles assist with 
expansion and contraction of 
chest cavity during breathingHeart pumps blood to lungs 
through pulmonary arteries
Alveolus
Bronchiole
Pleural  
membraneTrachea divides 
into two primary 
bronchi, one 
serving each lungTHE RESPIRATORY TRACT  Air is 
taken in through the nose and 
mouth, and filtered and purified  
in the upper respiratory tract—  
the airway extending as far as the 
trachea. Air continues down the  
lower respiratory tract, which begins 
where the larynx meets the trachea  
and extends deep into the lungs by 
means of an extensive network  
of bronchial airways.
BronchusMucous membranes in 
nasal cavity trap foreign 
bodies in inhaled air
Primary bronchi 
branch into ever- 
smaller airways 
(see diagram, 
below)

•181
Symptoms
• Breathlessness that is accompanied by  
a characteristic wheezing.
• Tight feeling in the chest.
• In severe attacks, possible increased pulse  
rate and clammy sweats.
• Dry cough.
• Possible anxiety and fear.
Causes
The increase in childhood asthma in the 
industrialized world during the last two decades 
of the 20th century is attributed by many to 
increased levels of pollution. There is a genetic 
tendency , however. Asthma is believed to be an 
allergic reaction to house dust, dust mites, 
pollen, fur, feathers, or tobacco smoke. It can 
also be induced by drugs, caffeine withdrawal, 
stress, or exercise. Foods such as dairy products, 
wheat, nuts, oranges, chocolate, and refined 
carbohydrates are known triggers. Asthma is 
also linked to high pollen counts, atmospheric 
changes, domestic heating systems, and some 
soft-furnishing materials.
Conventional care
Asthma sufferers receive treatment plans 
from doctors or specially trained asthma 
nurses. These include daily checks on the 
amount of air flowing in and out of the 
lungs using a peak-flow meter. In acute 
attacks, bronchodilating drugs are needed to 
widen the airways. Corticosteroids reduce 
inflammation. These drugs are usually taken 
by means of an inhaler. In serious attacks, 
hospitalization may be required for oxygen 
or the use of a powered ventilator to ease 
breathing. Inhalers used preventatively can 
reduce the impact of irritants.
Homeopathic medicine
Peak-flow monitoring is necessary , whatever the 
treatment. Homeopathic treatment of asthma is 
primarily constitutional. A practitioner will be 
particularly interested in an individual’s food 
preferences, their emotional makeup, and any 
significant environmental factors. The choice of remedy will largely be determined by symptoms  
(see page 18 ) , but certain remedies have an 
affinity with the respiratory tract. Arsen. alb.   
is indicated for bronchial constriction and 
Antimonium  tart. for bronchial congestion. 
Bryonia  is effective for the pain caused by 
irritation of the pleurae; and Calc. carb.  for 
ailments arising out of restrictions in the 
movement of the rib cage. Phosphorus  is used  
for respiratory problems linked with anxiety .
For acute asthma, or to boost the immune 
system, the tubercular, psoric, or sycotic 
nosodes  (see page 20)  may be given. Other 
remedies include Arsen. alb. , for attacks in the 
early hours, with chilliness, restlessness, and a 
desire for sips of water; Ipecac. , when there is 
persistent nausea; or Kali. carb. , for asthma 
between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m. causing exhaustion. 
If the trigger is allergy , the effects of allergens 
can be reduced by isopathic remedies  (see page 
21)— for example, by taking a remedy made 
from cat fur to treat sensitivity to cats.
Lifestyle
A pharmacist can advise about eradicating  
dust mites. Placing a child’s soft toys in a freezer 
for a few hours every week will kill dust mites. 
Bedrooms in particular should be kept as  
dust-free as possible, and carpets and soft 
furnishings shampooed regularly . All known 
sources of irritation should be avoided, and 
smoking forbidden in the home. Asthma 
sufferers are advised to exercise, but must  
learn to control their breathing, especially 
during an asthma attack.RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
An asthma attack occurs when the airways of the lungs become inflamed. This 
causes contraction of muscles in the walls of the airways and their subsequent 
narrowing. Asthma affects one in ten children of school age in some industrialized 
countries, but only three percent of adults. Asthma can be more serious and more 
difficult to treat in adults.ASTHMACASE HISTORY
John Carpenter, age three, had a year-long 
history of recurrent chest infections. Asthma 
had been diagnosed two months previously. 
His attacks developed from chesty coughs. 
He had taken antibiotics, bronchodilators, 
and corticosteroids, but had not responded 
to treatment or to the removal of house 
dust and pollens.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Described by his mother as an easy child 
but one that liked messes, John had been a 
poor sleeper as a baby, and had walked 
early. He tended to cry when disciplined, and 
was highly sensitive. He was very protective 
of his sister, and was a talkative little boy.
FOOD PREFERENCES
John had a very sweet tooth and a slight 
desire for salt. He enjoyed fatty foods and 
loved smoked meats.
GENERAL DETAILS
John lived with his parents and sister, and 
attended nursery school ﬁve mornings a 
week. He was part of a happy family, and 
there appeared to be no major stresses 
within it.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
John was prescribed high-potency 
Tuberculinum.  Two weeks later, he developed 
a wheezing cough after a cold. He was given 
Tuberculinum  again, which made him better 
initially, but then he deteriorated. He was 
then given sodium cromoglycate, a 
conventional asthma drug, four times daily. 
He still complained of a dry, tickly cough, 
and was given Coccus cacti  and encouraged 
to use salbutamol, a bronchodilator. None  
of a series of constitutional remedies 
helped. John was given corticosteroids, the 
long-term prospect of which concerned his 
mother. He was then prescribed Bacillinum  
as a preventative measure against colds 
and inﬂuenza, and advised to eliminate 
reﬁned carbohydrates from his diet and to 
eat little and often. He developed an acute 
infection soon after, but responded to 
Phosphorus  and then Sulphur , which had  
a very marked effect. He now takes an 
occasional dose of Sulphur , but is largely 
free of asthma and takes no  
conventional medication.CAUTION
• If an asthma sufferer turns pale or blue, 
with clammy skin, and is experiencing severe 
breathing difﬁculties, call 911 .
• If an acute attack persists for more than 
12 hours, consult a doctor.
• If the stated dose of treatment for acute 
asthma does not bring an attack under 
control, consult a doctor immediately.Alveolus

182 •
Symptoms
• A mild attack of tuberculosis has the same 
symptoms as mild influenza.
• In second-stage tuberculosis, there may be  
a slight fever, night sweats, fatigue, weight loss,  
a dry cough that eventually produces pus or 
bloody sputum, breathlessness, and chest pain.
• If the disease progresses further still, it may 
cause a pleural effusion (fluid between the 
linings, or pleura, of the lung and that of the 
chest cavity) or pneumothorax (air between 
the pleurae).
Causes
Tuberculosis is caused by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis , and is spread in droplets of 
mucus expelled in coughs and sneezes.  
If the infection is fought off successfully,  
a small scar forms in the lung tissue. The 
person is then immune unless they become 
undernourished or generally unwell in  
the future, in which case tuberculosis may 
flare up again. Occasionally, the primary 
infection spreads to other parts of the  
body via the lymphatic system and the 
bloodstream, a condition known as miliary 
tuberculosis, which is occasionally fatal. 
Tuberculosis is most common among the 
elderly, alcoholics, and people living in 
economically deprived areas.
Conventional care
In many industrialized countries, preventative 
measures are taken against tuberculosis in  
the form of inoculation of all children by  
the age of 13 with a live strain of the 
bacterium that causes tuberculosis in cattle. 
This is too weak to cause the disease in 
humans, yet it stimulates the immune system. 
Diagnosis of tuberculosis is by a primary  
test followed by a chest X-ray if the test is 
positive. The most common treatment is with 
three drugs—usually isoniazid, rifampicin, 
and pyrazinamide—taken over a long period. 
There is concern in some regions of the world 
that the disease has become resistant to these 
drugs. Other, shorter treatment regimens are 
therefore being tried.SERIOUS AILMENTS
TUBERCULOSIS
An infectious, bacterial disease, tuberculosis was once common worldwide and a killer, 
especially in mid-19th-century Europe, where it was responsible for one-quarter of 
deaths. This incidence fell until the 1980s but has increased since with the spread of 
HIV . The disease is now prevalent in Africa, Asia, and countries of the former USSR.
Homeopathic medicine
It is rare for a homeopathic practitioner to treat  
a tuberculosis patient exclusively . The disease 
has to be reported to the medical authorities,  
and will inevitably , and justifiably , be treated 
conventionally . Homeopathy can, however,  
play an important supportive role, and if  
indeed the disease is developing a resistance to 
conventional drugs, complementary treatment 
may become important—for example, in  
boosting the immune system.
The patient’s specific symptoms will be the 
main criteria in determining constitutional 
prescription  (see page 18 ) . Certain remedies, 
however, have an affinity with respiratory 
ailments. Arsen. alb.  is indicated for bronchial 
constriction and Lycopodium  with infection of 
the right lung. Phosphorus  is effective for treating 
inflammation of the mucous membranes; and 
Calc. carb.  is prescribed for gland enlargement.
For acute attacks, remedies include Bacillinum  
for head sweats; Calc. carb.  if the extremities  
are cold and clammy , with weakness and 
apprehension; and Arsen. alb.  if there is 
chilliness, exhaustion, anxiety , and a desire  
for sips of water.
Lifestyle
T uberculosis tends to affect people who are 
generally run down and otherwise in poor 
health. Adequate rest is important, as is a good 
diet, which should include plenty of potassium-
rich foods, raw vegetables, fruits, and protein 
from legumes and whole grains as well as fish and 
meat. Plenty of fresh air is beneficial. Bad habits 
such as smoking, drinking excess alcohol, and 
taking recreational drugs should be avoided.CASE HISTORY
The author has not personally treated a 
case of tuberculosis. The following is based 
on a report in French homeopathic literature 
by Dr. Nebel of Monteau at the beginning of 
the 20th century.
 Charles had suffered from pulmonary 
tuberculosis for ten years. His father and 
three siblings had died from it. Clinically,  
he showed signs of extensive tuberculosis, 
mainly affecting the left lung, with a cough 
and copious green sputum, which frequently 
contained blood.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Charles was very tall and thin, with an 
emaciated chest. He suffered sleeplessness 
and weariness. He was extremely depressed 
and worried about his health, being 
convinced that he would die.
FOOD PREFERENCES
A lover of acidic foods and fat, particularly 
meat fat, Charles had been known to eat 
lard. He also liked smoked meats and salty 
foods. He had a great thirst, sipping water 
constantly. His stomach was upset by acidic 
foods and very cold drinks. He would 
become very hungry during the night and 
have to eat something.
GENERAL DETAILS
Charles was often constipated and, although 
he felt the cold, he experienced night 
sweats. His symptoms were worse between 
midnight and 2 a.m. He exuded from his 
armpits and chest what his doctor described 
as the smell of tuberculosis.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Charles was prescribed Tuberculinum , 
which gave him chest pains. Within a few 
days, however, his cough and perspiration 
reduced signiﬁcantly, although he lost a 
little more weight. He tried other remedies. 
After taking Silica , his weight dropped 
further but his general health improved. 
After taking Arsen. alb. , he coughed only 
slightly in the morning and evening, he 
produced no sputum, his chest sounded 
better to his doctor, and he started gaining 
weight. After ten weeks his appetite was 
good, and he could walk farther than before 
without feeling breathless. He felt stronger 
than he had for years, and was hopeful for 
a complete recovery.CAUTION
• If tuberculosis is suspected because of 
contact with someone who has it, consult  
a doctor.
• If there are symptoms of tuberculous 
meningitis (stiff neck, severe headache, light-
intolerance, and confusion and drowsiness 
leading to coma), see a doctor immediately.

•183
Symptoms
• Breathlessness even when resting.
• Fever with alternate sweats and chills.
• Cough that produces yellow or green 
sputum. When the chest is listened to, there 
may be an absence of breathing sounds, or 
there may be wheezing or crackling sounds.
Causes
Pneumonia occurs when an infection of the 
upper airway spreads deep into the lung 
tissue and invades the alveoli. It may develop 
from a cold virus, but it is usually caused by 
bacteria, especially pneumococcal bacteria. 
Other, more obscure sources of infection are 
carried by mycoplasma and rickettsia 
(microorganisms). Pneumonia may be 
associated with immunodeficiency disorders, 
in which case unusual fungi or protozoa may 
be responsible. Pneumocystis pneumonia— 
common among AIDS sufferers—is an 
example of this. People taking inflammatory 
or immunosuppressive drugs long-term, or 
who smoke, are more likely to develop 
pneumonia than those who do not. The 
disease may also be caused by inhaling  
liquids or poisonous gases such as chlorine.
Conventional care
Diagnosis is by examination, chest X-ray , 
blood test, and sputum test, whereby a 
culture is grown in a laboratory . Patients with 
lobar pneumonia were once said to heal “by 
lysis or crisis” within five days. That is to say , 
the disease came to a head and then abated, 
or death followed from respiratory failure. 
Modern drugs enable recovery from 
pneumonia within about two weeks unless 
the patient is debilitated or old. In severe 
cases, oxygen therapy or artificial ventilation 
may be necessary .
Homeopathic medicine
In the initial stages of mild, viral pneumonia, 
treatment by an experienced homeopathic 
physician may be beneficial. With recurrent 
pneumonia, constitutional homeopathic 
treatment is certainly advisable in addition  to conventional treatment. A person’s  
specific symptoms will largely determine 
constitutional prescription  (see page 18) ,  
but certain remedies have an affinity with the 
lungs. Arsen. alb.  is prescribed for bronchial 
constriction; while Bacillinum  may be used  
for those with respiratory problems in  
whom chronic catarrh may easily give rise  
to infection, such as the elderly . Calc. carb.   
is effective for complications arising out of 
restrictions in the movement of the rib cage; 
and either Pulsatilla  or Phosphorus  may be 
used to treat irritation of the mucous 
membranes lining the respiratory tract.
In acute cases of pneumonia, Aconite   
may be prescribed if the onset is sudden, 
particularly in cold, dry weather, and there is 
chest pain, fever, anxiety , and a fear of dying. 
Phosphorus  is given for a cough producing 
rust-colored sputum, with weakness, 
trembling, nervousness, and numb extremities, 
and symptoms that are worse for lying on the 
left side. Bryonia  is prescribed for chest pain 
that is worse for the slightest movement but 
better for lying on the affected side.
Lifestyle
Plenty of vitamin C, which can also be  
taken as a preventative measure, and  
a good deal of rest, preferably sitting up  
in bed, are beneficial. Since dry air tends  
to make pneumonia worse, rooms should  
be humidified. Inhalations of steam or herbs 
such as echinacea may help. The diet should 
ideally be low in refined carbohydrates  
and include plenty of fluids. It is advisable  
not to smoke. Manipulation by an osteopath 
or a physiotherapist may help to clear  
the lungs of sputum.RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Pneumonia is inflammation of the lungs, which may be mild if a person is generally 
healthy , but life-threatening in those who are very young, elderly , immobilized or 
inactive, alcoholic, or already suffering from respiratory , heart, or kidney disease. Lobar 
pneumonia is when one lung only is affected; bronchopneumonia affects both lungs.PNEUMONIACASE HISTORY
Fiona, a 38-year-old dental technician, 
suffered from whooping cough at age six, 
and had a history of recurrent pneumonia. 
She was also a migraine sufferer. The 
pneumonia would be heralded by a sudden 
drop in energy levels, cold sweats and 
shakiness, constipation, a characteristic 
cough, and the production of sputum.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Of medium build and slightly plump,  
Fiona described herself as having a quick 
temper and being overemotional, crying 
easily when angry or frustrated. She 
craved sympathy and reassurance, 
especially when unwell, and hated being 
alone. She had a high sex drive, which was 
based more on an emotional than  
a physical need.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Fiona had a strong craving for sweets, 
especially before a migraine or attack  
of pneumonia. Even when she had a  
fever, she was not thirsty. She had an 
intolerance of, and an aversion to, 
anything fatty, although she liked butter 
and cream. She disliked warm foods and 
drinks. Rich foods, ice cream, and pork 
gave her indigestion.
GENERAL DETAILS
Fiona preferred hot weather, but disliked 
being in stuffy rooms, where she craved cool 
air. She felt worse by the sea and was 
disturbed by noise. Her energy levels were 
low, and she had never slept well, even as  
a child. The pneumonia tended to occur 
when she was premenstrual.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
A diet was devised to strengthen Fiona’s 
liver and make her bowels more efﬁcient. 
This relieved the constipation, and her 
energy levels rose. She then developed a 
cold that went on to her chest. She was 
prescribed Pulsatilla , and advised to take 
antibiotics, although she chose not to. 
She recovered from the acute attack within 
a week. She still had a cough, which 
responded to Sticta , although she 
remained catarrhal. She was then given 
Merc. sol.  and has been healthy ever 
since. She takes this remedy at the ﬁrst 
signs of a cold.CAUTION
• If symptoms do not respond to treatment 
within 24 hours, see a doctor.
• If there is blood in the sputum or chest 
pain, or if the lips turn blue, consult a  
doctor immediately.

184 •
The human body’s complex network of blood 
vessels is powered by a central pump —the 
heart  (see below) . Blood is pumped out 
through the aorta into all the major arteries. 
These subdivide into arterioles and 
capillaries, through the walls of which 
nutrients pass into tissues or organs. 
Contractions of the heart muscle pump 
blood along the arteries. Blood flow along 
veins is assisted by the contraction of 
muscles in the limbs. Valves prevent it  
from flowing backward. Many of the 
diseases of the cardiovascular system arise 
either from the constriction (angina) or 
blockage (stroke) of blood vessels,  
from malfunctioning valves, or from 
problems with the pumping action of  
the heart (palpitations).
Transportation system
Capillaries collect the waste products of 
metabolism  (see page 188) , such as carbon 
dioxide, and drain into venules and veins, 
which carry blood back to the heart and 
lungs. The portal system connects the small 
intestine to the liver. Nutrient-rich blood is 
carried by the portal vein from the digestive 
organs to the liver, where nutrients are 
absorbed for processing or stored until  
they are needed.SERIOUS AILMENTS
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
The circulatory, or cardiovascular, system consists of the heart, the blood 
vessels, and the blood itself. It continuously supplies blood to every tissue 
in the body, providing oxygen, a variety of nutrients, minerals, hormones, 
antibodies, and clotting agents. It removes metabolic waste products.
Superior vena cava carries deoxygenated 
blood from head and arms
Right atrium
Inferior vena cava carries deoxygenated 
blood from lower bodyAorta carries oxygenated blood, 
and branches into major arteries
Pulmonary artery—the only artery 
to carry deoxygenated blood—
branches into each lung
Left atrium
Valves
Left ventricle
Right ventricleSeptum is a thick muscle wall 
dividing heart in two verticallyTHE HEART  There are two chambers, 
an atrium and a ventricle, on each 
side of the heart. The left side takes 
oxygenated blood from the lungs 
and pumps it around the body. The 
right side takes deoxygenated blood 
from around the body and pumps it 
to the lungs.Axillary 
artery
Superior vena cava
Pulmonary arteries
Heart  
(see diagram, below)
Inferior vena cavaAortaHow the system works
BLOOD SUPPLIES An average male adult has 
between 5 and 6 quarts (liters) of blood,  
which is circulated around the body by means  
of an extensive network of arteries (shown  
in red) and veins (shown in blue), both  
of which extend into all bodily tissue. Blood 
contains red blood cells that carry oxygen,  
white blood cells that fight infection, and blood 
platelets, which prevent leakage from blood 
vessels. Just over half the volume of blood  
is plasma, a straw-colored fluid consisting  
mainly of water, in which substances such  
as nutrients and hormones are carried.

•185
Symptoms
• Pain resembling a tight band around the chest 
that can spread up into the neck and jaw and 
down into an arm, usually the left arm.
• Symptoms associated with exercise, especially 
after eating, stress, and during very hot or  
cold weather.
• Possible dizziness, palpitations, nausea, cold 
sweats, breathlessness, and cold extremities.
• Symptoms wear off after rest.
Causes
The direct cause of angina is not enough oxygen 
reaching the heart. This may be because arteries 
supplying the heart have been damaged by a 
disease such as atherosclerosis (arteries 
narrowed by fatty deposits), or because of high 
blood pressure, malfunctioning heart valves, 
anemia, or disturbed heart rhythms. Angina 
may also be caused by spasms in blood vessels. 
A less common cause is overproduction of 
hormones (by the thyroid gland) that makes  
the heart race.
Conventional care
Angina may be diagnosed by measuring 
electrical activity in the heart while the patient  
is on a treadmill, or by X-raying altered blood 
vessels injected with a highlighting substance  
(a practice known as coronary angiography). 
Conventional treatment is with drugs that 
improve circulation, such as glyceryl trinitrate, 
beta blockers, or calcium channel blockers. 
Surgery may be necessary . Angioplasty is the 
insertion and inflation of a balloon in a blocked 
vessel to widen it. Coronary artery bypass 
entails placing a section of vein—from a leg, for 
example—in the heart to bypass a blocked vein.
Homeopathic medicine
A full case history is studied along with the 
results of explorative tests. Particular attention  
is paid to triggers of angina and location of the 
pain. There are two aspects of homeopathic 
treatment: constitutional treatment aims to 
relieve pressure in the heart long-term, while 
acute remedies are prescribed for attacks.  Although specific symptoms ultimately 
determine the choice of constitutional 
remedy  (see page 18) , those that have an 
affinity with the circulatory system include 
Apis, effective for fluid retention; Argent. 
nit., associated with improved nerve 
conduction to coronary arteries; Arnica ,  
if there is damaged heart muscle—after a 
heart attack for example; Arsen. alb. , for 
problems in the left side of the heart; and 
Aurum , for atherosclerosis, other arterial 
diseases, and valve problems.
Acute remedies include Cactus grand. ,  
if the chest feels as though there is an iron  
band around it, and if there are breathing 
difficulties, cold sweats, pain in the left arm, 
and falling blood pressure; and Lilium , when 
the chest feels as though it is in a vise, and 
there are palpitations and pain in the right 
arm. Latrodectus mac.  is used for serious chest 
pains, rapid pulse, and numb fingers; and 
Spigelia  is given for palpitations with a thirst 
for hot water and breathing difficulties 
relieved by lying on the right.
Lifestyle
Angina sufferers are advised to lose weight and 
work out a diet for life, with plenty of oily fish, 
garlic, and brewer’s yeast, but little animal fat, 
refined carbohydrates, salt, caffeine, and alcohol. 
Antioxidant and fish-oil supplements may help; 
as may the use of fresh ginger in cooking. 
Smoking is not advisable. Relaxation techniques 
or meditation and regular exercise are advisable. 
Any conventional drugs should be reviewed 
with a doctor.CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
A fairly common complaint, angina consists of a constricting chest pain. In the 
developed world this condition usually affects men over 50, but sometimes those 
as young as 30; in women it generally strikes in later life. Angina occurs when 
extra demands are made on the heart during exercise or in stressful situations 
when oxygen supply may be restricted.ANGINACASE HISTORY
Ella, a 35-year-old lawyer and mother of 
two children, had experienced high blood 
pressure and severe angina since she  
was 14. (Her mother had died of a stroke 
at 46.) Ella’s drugs included a glyceryl 
trinitrate spray for the pain and a diuretic 
to lower her blood pressure. She had had 
a mild heart attack the year before her 
consultation and a stroke three years 
before that. She suffered severe angina 
about three times a year, preceded by 
extreme fatigue. She often had less 
serious attacks, brought on by tiredness 
and stress.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Ella was a vivacious woman but confessed 
to being depressed at times about her 
condition, fearing that it would kill her.  
She was tearful and easily frightened, 
sometimes waking up with a great feeling  
of foreboding and anxiety.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Frequent nausea and a throbbing feeling  
in the stomach often resulted in a loss of 
appetite. At such times Ella would lose her 
taste for meat, which she usually liked. 
She often experienced a bitter-tasting ﬂuid 
rising into her mouth, making all food 
taste acrid.
GENERAL DETAILS
Ella was worse when lying on her left side 
and on her back. She experienced low times 
at 11 a.m. and 11 p.m., and she had 
difﬁculty sleeping because of throbbing in 
various parts of her body and disturbing 
dreams. She liked to be out in the open air.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
No attempt was made to change Ella’s 
conventional drugs in view of her medical 
history. A satisfactory constitutional remedy 
was never found, but the chest pains were 
able to be controlled and eventually 
eliminated by regular and as required use of 
Cactus grand.  This also resulted in a much 
reduced use of her spray. Ella eventually 
stopped having severe attacks altogether. 
Two years after commencing homeopathic 
treatment, she felt able to undertake a third 
pregnancy, and eventually gave birth to a 
healthy boy. She remains well unless she 
becomes very overtired.CAUTION
• If pain lasts for more than ﬁve minutes and 
does not ease after rest, call 911 . If trained, 
administer ﬁrst aid for a heart attack.
• If angina attacks are becoming progressively 
worse, consult a doctor.
• Never change the dosage of conventional 
drugs without consulting a doctor.

186 •
Symptoms
• Heart feels as though it is beating harder or 
faster than usual.
• Fluttering or thumping in the chest, with 
an alarming sensation as though the heart has 
stopped beating.
• Possible faintness and breathlessness.
Causes
Heartbeat is controlled by the autonomic 
nervous system. If nerve impulses are disrupted, 
the heart will continue beating, but at its own, 
usually slower rate. The most common form of 
palpitation—usually experienced at rest—is 
caused by ectopic heartbeats, when a premature 
beat is followed by an unusually long pause. 
This feels like a thumping or fluttering in the 
chest, and is not usually indicative of heart 
disease. It is caused by stimulants—for example 
large amounts of caffeine or heavy smoking. 
Palpitations with an irregular heartbeat may be 
symptomatic of heart disease. They may also be 
caused by an overactive thyroid gland, high 
fever, food allergy , and certain recreational drugs, 
such as amphetamines or cocaine. Palpitations 
may be a side-effect of some prescribed drugs, 
particularly those that regulate blood pressure, 
or they may be triggered by anxiety .
Conventional care
Treatment depends on the underlying  
cause. Investigations may include 24-hour 
electrocardiograms (ECGs) to explore the level 
of electrical activity in the heart, and thyroid-
function tests to identify gland disorders. 
Appropriate drug therapy will follow . In extreme 
cases, a normal heart rhythm may have to be re-
established using cardioversion (electric shocks).
Homeopathic medicine
In addition to an individual’s medical history , a 
homeopath will consider emotional state, any 
local aggravating factors, such as the effects of 
cold air or physical exhaustion, and food 
preferences. Prescription of constitutional 
remedies will be largely determined by specific 
symptoms  (see page 18) , but some remedies SERIOUS AILMENTS
PALPITATIONS
“Palpitations” is the term used to describe a general awareness that the heart is 
beating, or the sensation that it is beating irregularly , or faster, or with more force 
than it should, given the level of exertion. Not all palpitations indicate a serious 
condition, but they should be investigated. The heart normally beats at a rate of 
about 70 beats a minute.
have an affinity with the heart. Agaricus  is 
associated with heart irregularities induced by 
stimulants. Apis is indicated for organic heart 
disease accompanied by fluid retention. China  is 
associated with nervous exhaustion. Conium  is 
effective for an incompetent mitral valve, and 
Kali. carb.  is indicated if there are associated 
respiratory problems such as asthma. Other 
remedies include Argentum nit. , Aurum met. , 
Calc.  carb. , Lachesis , Nat. mur . , Nux vomica , 
Phosphorus , Sepia, and Sulphur .
Acute attacks are also treated according to 
specific symptoms. Remedies include Aconite , 
if onset is sudden, especially after shock,  
with a fear of dying; and Nux vomica , if 
palpitations result from overindulgence, or  
if there is physical and mental exhaustion 
with overarousal from doing too much, 
chilliness, and irritability . Digitalis  is given for 
palpitations preceding a feeling as though the 
heart has stopped, with a fear that the least 
movement might make it stop again; and 
Lachesis  is prescribed for menopausal women 
who feel faint and anxious, and complain of  
a constricted feeling in the chest.
Lifestyle
Smoking is inadvisable, and those who consume 
large amounts of caffeine should reduce their 
intake. The diet should be low in fat and refined 
carbohydrates, and high in oily fish and 
vegetarian proteins. A nutritionist can advise 
about possible food allergy , but it is worth 
eliminating suspected triggers from the diet. 
Plenty of rest, sleep, and relaxation techniques 
or meditation are advisable. Time-management 
techniques can help to reduce stress levels.CASE HISTORY
Clare, a credit controller, age 37, had  
a two-month history of palpitations. She 
described thuds in her chest—three a 
minute or one every two minutes—at any 
time of day. She had cut out caffeine and 
increased the amount of oats in her diet, 
but neither helped. She felt worse for 
stress. An ECG was normal. She had been 
referred to a cardiologist, and prescribed 
a beta blocker, which helped a good deal. 
She was taking an oral contraceptive and 
was a nonsmoker.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Clare was a nervous person, concerned 
about what others were thinking and,  
in her view, not tough enough. She  
was easily offended, but bottled up  
her feelings. She resented what she 
considered to be bad treatment by her 
mother-in-law.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Clare liked sweet foods, vinegar, and spices, 
and especially chocolate and carbonated 
drinks. She disliked herbal teas.
GENERAL DETAILS
Clare was better for sun and heat. She slept 
six hours a night and awoke unrefreshed. 
She complained of a poor memory, a lack  
of energy since puberty, split ends, brittle 
nails, cold extremities, and loose bowel 
movements when she was anxious.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
On her ﬁrst visit Clare was given Staphisagria , 
and it was suggested that she write a letter  
to her mother-in-law airing her grievances,  
but that she did not mail it. She was also 
advised not to take the contraceptive pill.  
By her next visit, four weeks later, the 
cardiologist had conﬁrmed that there was  
no heart disease. The palpitations were less 
frequent and less severe, and Clare’s energy 
levels were higher. She was put on mineral 
supplements and seen a month later. She 
had not had any palpitations, felt much less 
stressed, and was sleeping better, although 
she was restless, and had become insecure 
and fastidious. She had also developed a 
craving for fats. After being prescribed Arsen. 
alb., Clare had no further problems. She now 
takes no medication other than the 
contraceptive pill.CAUTION
• If palpitations are accompanied by  
chest pain, breathing difﬁculties,  
dizziness, sweating, or fainting, see  
a doctor immediately.
• If palpitations last for several hours, or 
recur over several days, consult a doctor.

•187
Symptoms
• Possible sudden loss of speech or the  
ability to move.
• Sudden heaviness or numbness of the  
limbs. Blurred vision.
• Confusion, dizziness, and loss of 
consciousness.
Causes
A stroke may result from a thrombosis,  
an embolism, or a hemorrhage. Cerebral 
thrombosis may be due to atherosclerosis, when 
blood vessels are narrowed by fatty deposits.  
In an embolism, a small blood clot breaks off  
an artery wall somewhere in the body and 
lodges in an artery supplying the brain. A 
hemorrhage occurs when blood leaks out of  
a weak-walled artery in the brain. Other causes 
of stroke include atrial fibrillation (irregular 
heartbeat), damaged heart valves, or a heart 
attack. All three may lead to the formation  
of clots in the heart. These may travel to the 
brain, causing an embolism. Strokes are more 
common in those with diabetes, smokers, 
women on oral contraceptives, and people  
with high cholesterol levels.
Conventional care
One in two first strokes is fatal. Recovery 
depends upon the severity of the stroke and 
rehabilitation. Scanning methods can establish 
the cause of a stroke and the extent of the 
damage. Thrombolytic drugs may be used  
to dissolve blood clots, and aspirin and 
anticoagulants to prevent further clots. Surgery 
may be needed to remove arterial obstructions. 
About half of those who survive a stroke recover 
to a greater or lesser degree. Those with 
disabilities may require physiotherapy , speech 
therapy , or occupational therapy .
Homeopathic medicine
Constitutional treatment from an experienced 
homeopathic practitioner can play an important 
complementary role in recuperation after a 
stroke. The choice of constitutional remedy will 
be mainly influenced by the stroke victim’s specific symptoms  (see page 18 ) , but remedies 
that have an affinity with the blood vessels 
include Arnica , which is indicated for shock  
and a hemorrhagic stroke; Hyoscyamus ,  
which is effective for a paralytic stroke that  
is associated with confused and inappropriate 
behavior; and Opium , for a major stroke  
with total muscular relaxation and 
unconsciousness. Nux vomica  and Rhus tox.   
may also be prescribed constitutionally .
Specific remedies to be taken during a stroke 
and to aid recovery include Aconite , if a patient 
is panicky and afraid of dying; and Opium , if 
they become unconscious, with a bluish, florid 
face and heavy , labored breathing. Arnica  is 
good immediately after a stroke and Aurum met.  
if there is great depression. Baryta carb.  is 
suitable for the very elderly and the physically 
and mentally weak.
Lifestyle
Diet and the management of stress levels are 
important in stroke prevention and for those 
who have already suffered a stroke. The diet 
should be modified in order to reduce the 
amount of animal fats and proteins consumed—
including dairy products—and to increase fiber 
intake. It is advisable to eat plenty of fruits and 
fresh vegetables every day , and to lose excess 
weight and exercise regularly . If the stroke  
is thrombotic, the herb ginkgo biloba may 
improve blood flow . Smoking is inadvisable. 
Relaxation and meditation are beneficial, 
especially for those with high blood pressure  
or who are under stress. Women who have had 
a stroke or thrombosis, focal migraine or who 
have a family history of heart disease, should 
avoid taking oral contraceptives.CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
A cerebrovascular accident, or stroke, occurs when the blood supply to part  
of the brain is interrupted or insufficient. Symptoms vary , depending on which 
part of the brain is affected. Strokes are quite common, affecting 5–8 per 1,000 
population over the age of 25. About 16 percent of all women and 8 percent  
of all men are likely to die of a stroke.STROKECASE HISTORY
Thomas was a 79-year-old former engineer. 
Nine months before his consultation, he had 
fallen in the bathtub. Three months later,  
he fell twice more. He had since been 
complaining of unsteadiness, difﬁculty in 
writing, frequent urination, general 
muzziness, and poor short-term memory. 
His doctor had diagnosed a minor stroke. 
Thomas’s blood pressure was high, and he 
showed all the signs of a right-sided stroke.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Thomas’s character had changed since the 
stroke. He was by nature a leader, and was 
used to being in control of his life. He was 
thorough to the point of fastidiousness.  
He now felt frustrated because he could  
no longer drive and had had to slow down 
generally. His wife claimed that he was  
more attentive to her, but that at times  
he appeared to look through her. Thomas 
slept ﬁtfully.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Thomas liked sweets, and salty and acidic 
foods, but hated pork, milk, and pudding.  
He claimed that pork and alcohol upset  
his stomach.
GENERAL DETAILS
Thomas tended to get hot at night and  
to feel as though there was a lump in his 
throat preventing him from swallowing.  
His stomach was tender and sensitive  
to touch.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Thomas was originally prescribed 
Anacardium or.  because of his feeling of 
being detached from reality. This remedy 
improved his memory, and he felt more 
himself. His blood pressure came down,  
and he felt steadier on his feet. He was  
then given Baryta mur.  and sent for 
physiotherapy. This improved his unsteady 
gait. His blood pressure was normal by now. 
He looked much better and was taking 
exercise, although he was still forgetful. 
Thomas then had a fall, after which he  
was prescribed Arnica  followed by another 
dose of Baryta mur.  He continued to pick up 
and even his memory started to improve. 
He is still making a slow and steady 
recovery, and to date has exhibited no 
further stroke symptoms.CAUTION
• If there are any symptoms of a stroke,  
see a doctor immediately.
• If a stroke victim loses consciousness, 
place them in a safe position ( see page 
270) and call 911 .

188 •
The human body needs energy to function. 
That energy comes from food, but only after  
it has been processed into substances that can 
be assimilated by various parts of the body . 
Some nutrients, such as minerals, can be 
absorbed directly along the way down the 
digestive tract, but substances such as 
proteins have to be broken down into  
smaller molecules.
Food processing
Digestion starts in the mouth, where saliva 
containing a digestive enzyme called amylase 
lubricates food as it is chewed. In the 
stomach proteins and fats are broken down  
in an acidic environment, and salt, water, and 
alcohol are absorbed. Beyond the stomach (in 
the duodenum), acidity is neutralized before 
food is treated by secretions from associated 
digestive organs—the liver, gallbladder, and 
pancreas. Bile from the liver and gallbladder 
emulsifies fats, and pancreatic enzymes break 
down proteins, starch, and fats.
Using nutrients
The liver is, in effect, the chemical factory  
of the body . Among many important 
metabolic functions, it stores glucose, 
vitamins, and minerals produced by food 
processing but not immediately usable by the 
body , and facilitates the breakdown of fats, 
which is vital for the conversion of food into 
energy . As well as digestive enzymes, the 
pancreas produces insulin (a hormone), and 
glycogen (a starch), both of which regulate 
sugar levels. Diabetes is the result of 
diminished insulin action. In the small 
intestine, the breakdown of food is completed. 
Nutrients are absorbed into the blood, carried 
to cells, and used in the release of energy . 
Undigested food is expelled from the anus.
Digestive ailments such as irritable bowel 
syndrome or ulcerative colitis are believed  
to result from, among other factors, an 
unsuitable diet or chemical imbalances  
in the metabolic process.SERIOUS AILMENTS
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
The digestive system basically consists of a long tube that 
starts at the mouth and ends at the anus. The aim of the 
system is to break food down for absorption into the body . 
Associated digestive organs, such as the liver, process 
THE DIGESTIVE TRACT  From where 
food enters the body at the mouth 
to where waste products are 
expelled at the anus, the 
digestive tract extends over  
a distance of up to 26 ft ( 8 m). 
Food can take anything from  
13 to 20 hours to complete  
its journey through the system. 
Coordinated by the hypothalamus  
in the brain, the digestive system 
includes associated digestive organs 
such as the liver, gallbladder,  
and pancreas.In mouth, teeth crush food 
into small pieces, which are 
rolled by tongue into ball 
ready for swallowing
Salivary glands secret 
enzyme into mouth to 
lubricate food and start 
digestive breakdown
Food is rhythmically 
squeezed down 
esophagus
Liver is key 
organ controlling 
metabolism
Digested food 
constituents are 
absorbed through 
walls of small 
intestine into blood 
and lymph vessels
Water is absorbed 
from undigested 
food in colonIn stomach, food 
is broken down by 
hydrochloric acid 
and pepsin (an 
enzyme)
Hormones in pancreas 
stimulate release of 
enzymes to break 
down food and control 
absorption of nutrients
Solid waste 
passes into 
rectum before 
being expelled 
from anusDigestion & metabolismnutrients into substances that can be used for the production 
of energy and for the building and repair of body tissues, 
cells, and the constituents of blood—metabolic processes 
that take digestion a stage further.

•189
Symptoms
• Alternating constipation and diarrhea.
• Cramping pains in the lower abdomen and 
sometimes the feeling of not having emptied 
the bowel on passing stools.
• Production of copious amounts of flatulence, 
the passing of which usually brings relief.
Causes
There may be several causes of IBS. The basic 
one is a disturbance in the action of the large 
intestinal muscle. This may be the result of 
stress at work or due to emotional upset, for 
example, or of fear, such as that of serious 
illness. It may be the result of a low-fiber  
diet or an intolerance of wheat, corn, dairy 
products, fruits, tea, coffee, or vegetables.  
IBS may also be due to an overgrowth  
of organisms such as Candida albicans   
in the digestive tract, to the excessive use  
of laxatives, or to spinal maladjustment that 
affects nerves serving the digestive system.
Conventional care
IBS is treated with antispasmodic drugs  
and other painkillers, antidiarrheal drugs,  
and a high-fiber diet. Counseling may be 
recommended for those suffering from  
stress. Diagnosis is made after ruling out  
the possibility of other ailments with similar 
symptoms, such as ulcerative colitis or cancer. 
A physical examination may include the 
passing of an instrument into the anus and 
colon—a colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy—or 
a barium enema, which outlines the inside of 
the intestine.
Homeopathic medicine
A homeopathic practitioner will take a full 
medical history , paying particular attention to 
food preferences and IBS triggers. Constitutional 
remedies will be determined largely by an 
individual’s symptoms  (see page 18) , but certain 
remedies have an affinity with the colon. 
Argentum nit.  is indicated for irritation of the mucous membranes of the intestine and 
problems with the control of the gut by the 
autonomic nervous system. Cantharis  is 
associated with inflammation of the whole 
gastrointestinal tract, especially the lower bowel. 
Colocynthis  is also used to treat irritation of the 
gastrointestinal tract. Other constitutional 
remedies often used are Arsen. alb. , Carbo veg. , 
Nux vomica , Pulsatilla , and China.
Remedies for acute symptoms include 
Argentum nit. , for excessive flatulence, 
constipation alternating with diarrhea, pain  
in the left, upper abdomen, mucus in the  
stools, fluttering in the stomach, and great 
apprehension. Colocynthis  is prescribed for 
griping pains that are relieved by bending 
double or applying pressure to the abdomen, 
and that are associated with anger. Cantharis  
is particularly suitable for treating women 
who have burning abdominal pains, cystitis, 
great thirst, nausea, and vomiting.
Lifestyle
Relaxation techniques will help stress-related 
problems. Fluid intake should be increased, but 
alcohol consumption reduced. Regular meals 
and exercise are both essential. If a particular 
food is believed to aggravate the condition, it 
should be eliminated from the diet for at least 
four days, and then reintroduced and symptoms 
observed. A nutritionist can advise about this 
and dietary changes that might be beneficial.  
An osteopath or physiotherapist may be able to 
help if there is spinal maladjustment.DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
Irritable bowel syndrome is the most common intestinal disorder. It afflicts  
10–20 percent of adults in parts of the developed world, and twice as many 
women as men. It often starts in early adulthood and, although distressing, is not 
life-threatening. Formerly known as irritable colon syndrome or spastic colon,  
IBS tends to be intermittent.IRRITABLE BOWEL 
SYNDROME (IBS)CASE HISTORY
Alf was a 42-year-old construction worker 
who experienced periods of loose bowel 
movements and lower abdominal spasms 
lasting for a couple of months. This had 
begun two years before—after the breakup 
of a relationship. He was taking 
antispasmodic and antidiarrheal drugs.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Alf was convinced that his symptoms were 
stress-induced. He would get diarrhea, for 
example, if he was lonely. He often woke 
terriﬁed in the middle of the night.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Alf had very few likes and dislikes,  
and no foods seemed to aggravate his 
condition. He had a great thirst, mainly  
for acidic drinks. Lemon juice relieved  
his symptoms.
FEARS
Alf feared darkness, looking into deep water, 
and being alone, and worried that dogs 
might attack him. He hated cemeteries and 
anything connected with death.
GENERAL DETAILS
Alf slept badly and snored loudly. He 
complained of thrush, ear infections, bad 
breath, dry skin, and fatigue. He was better 
in company, and for light and warmth.  
He was incontinent when frightened.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Since Alf’s condition was related to 
emotional stress, he was given 
Stramonium.  A month later he was much 
better but still complained of abdominal 
spasms and colicky pains in the 
intestines. He was prescribed Cuprum.   
At his next appointment, he revealed  
that a preference for masturbation  
had contributed to the failure of his 
relationship. He was given Bufo for this 
masturbatory tendency. A month later, his 
bowels were much better as a result of 
the Cuprum.  He felt that he had come to 
terms with his sexuality, and he had a new 
relationship. He rarely suffered pain or 
diarrhea, but was still not happy on his 
own. Stramonium  was repeated. Alf was 
not seen for eight months, when IBS 
recurred due to stress. Stramonium  was 
again given, since when Alf has been ﬁne.CAUTION
• If symptoms are associated with 
persistent weight loss, consult a doctor.
• If there is fever and blood in the feces, 
see a doctor within 12 hours.
• Symptoms should be investigated 
promptly in patients over 50 in order to  
rule out cancer.

190 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
Symptoms
• Abdominal pain on the left side.
• Diarrhea, with mucus and blood in  
the feces.
• In severe cases, fever and general malaise.
• Possible anemia and, if toxins get into the 
bloodstream, septicemia.
Causes
Although the exact cause of ulcerative colitis 
is unknown, it is believed that food allergy , 
infection, autoimmune problems, low levels 
of digestive enzymes and stomach acid,  
stress, and some antibiotics aggravate the 
condition. There may be a genetic tendency . 
Many sufferers are found to be emotionally 
stressed, especially if they are frustrated at 
work or grieving.
Conventional care
Diagnosis is by means of a barium enema and 
an endoscopy of the rectum and lower colon.  
If these are not conclusive, a biopsy , whereby  
a small piece of the bowel lining is removed, 
may be performed. Infections can be discounted 
by analyzing stool samples. Treatment is with 
sulfasalazine and its derivatives and possibly 
corticosteroid drugs. Ulcerative colitis is a 
potentially serious condition, and surgery may 
be necessary . In a few cases of persistent colitis, 
colonic cancer has been known to develop, so 
regular examinations are advisable.
Homeopathic medicine
Constitutional assessment is a prerequisite  
of effective homeopathic treatment. A full 
medical will include referral for colonic 
investigation if necessary . Specific symptoms 
will then be studied, along with any 
aggravating factors that have been observed, 
and emotional temperament.
The most important criteria in determining 
constitutional treatment are the individual’s 
symptoms  (see page 18) . Some remedies have 
an affinity for the digestive tract, and are 
particularly effective in treating the symptoms 
of inflammation of the colon. Cantharis  is prescribed for inflammation of the lining of 
the gut and the production of thick, sticky 
mucus. Colchicum  is given for colitis with 
dysentery-like symptoms. Colocynthis  is 
effective for colicky and neuralgic pains 
induced by irritation of the intestine; and 
Merc. corr .  is used for constant straining of the 
rectum, which is not eased by passing stools. 
Arsen. alb. , Nux vomica , and Sulphur  are other 
commonly used constitutional remedies.
Remedies for acute flare-ups of colitis 
include Merc. corr . , when there are hot,  
foul-smelling stools containing blood and 
mucus, and cutting pains in the abdomen  
on passing a stool, which are not relieved  
by emptying the bowel; Arsen. alb. , for 
restlessness, anxiety , burning abdominal  
pains with vomiting, a frequent desire for  
sips of warm drinks, and attacks that come on 
around midnight; and Phosphorus , if stools are 
bloody , and pain is relieved by passing a stool 
but then the anus feels as though it is gaping.
Lifestyle
Changing to a high-fiber diet with few dairy 
products may reduce the likelihood of further 
attacks. Other foods and drinks that are best 
avoided include refined carbohydrates, those 
containing caffeine, and alcohol. A nutritionist 
will be able to advise further. Smoking is 
inadvisable. When consulting a doctor about 
infections, colitis sufferers should draw 
attention to their condition, which may be 
exacerbated by taking antibiotics. Relaxation 
techniques and meditation are advisable for 
those leading stressful lives. During a colitis 
attack, the most suitable foods are those that 
are easily digested.A fairly rare condition, ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory bowel disease in 
which the linings of the rectum and colon become progressively more ulcerated. 
Colitis affects between 40 and 50 people per 100,000 in parts of the developed 
world, and is most common in young and middle-aged adults. Attacks usually 
occur at intervals.ULCERATIVE COLITIS
CAUTION
• If there is persistent weight loss of  
more than about 1 lb (0.5 kg) a week, 
consult a doctor.
• If there is fever, and blood and mucus in 
the stools, see a doctor within 12 hours.CASE HISTORY
David was a 41-year-old stockbroker. 
Originally diagnosed as having irritable 
bowel syndrome, his condition had since 
been identiﬁed by a colonoscopy as 
ulcerative colitis. He believed that an 
infection picked up while traveling had 
made his condition worse. He was taking  
a corticosteroid and a sulfasalazine 
derivative, before which he had ﬁve or six 
watery bowel movements a day. His anus 
was raw and sore. He had great ﬂatulence, 
with some pain, and had to get up in the 
early morning to empty his bowels.
PERSONAL DETAILS
David’s father had died when he was  
eight, and his mother had relied heavily on 
him. He felt great relief on going away to 
college, and did well in his work, although it 
was his main source of stress. He had lost 
a nine-month-old daughter, a victim of crib 
death. David was not sure he had gotten 
over this. He described himself as solid, but 
feared being incapacitated by illness.
FOOD PREFERENCES
David had a fairly sweet tooth. He liked 
vinegar and spices, but avoided them in 
case they upset him. He believed that milk 
and cheese upset his bowel. He loved tea, 
and had not smoked for 12 years.
GENERAL DETAILS
David felt better in dry heat and worse in 
humid conditions. He slept well and awoke 
refreshed, but had to get up immediately.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
David was treated with Sulphur , after which 
his condition improved, with fewer and 
ﬁrmer bowel movements. The corticosteroid 
dosage was reduced, and David was able to 
sleep in later in the mornings. About this 
time he had dreams concerning his job  
and family, but he continued to improve, 
reducing his conventional drugs. He  
was then prescribed the nosode of  
measles (see page 20)  since he had 
suffered a bad attack as a child. This 
remedy worked to good effect, so the 
potency was increased. David’s progress 
continued and he reduced his drugs  
further. When last seen, he was on  
a maintenance dose of mesalazine,  
and continued to improve.

•191
Symptoms
• Frequent and copious urination.
• Continuous thirst.
• Tiredness and apathy as a result of  
reduced energy production.
• Possible loss of weight.
• Possible cramps, blurred vision, faintness, 
breathlessness, erectile dysfunction, menstrual 
problems, and lowering of resistance to infection.
Causes
There is a genetic tendency to develop diabetes. 
In young people it is believed to result from a 
viral infection, although it may be due to auto-
immune problems. It usually strikes between 
the ages of 10 and 15. In T ype 2 diabetes, the 
main factor is obesity . The body becomes 
resistant to the effects of insulin.
Diabetes often comes to light during illnesses 
such as pancreatitis or after an infection, while 
taking drugs such as diuretics, or during 
pregnancy . Chromium deficiency may also be a 
factor. The cells of the pancreas are destroyed as 
diabetes progresses, so that insulin production 
stops almost completely . Without regular  
insulin injections, a diabetic will become 
hyperglycemic (excess glucose in the blood).
Conventional care
People with insulin-dependent diabetes require 
insulin injections and a balanced diet that 
regulates carbohydrate intake. Glucose levels  
in the blood or urine are monitored carefully; 
high levels indicate that glucose is not being 
absorbed. T ype 2 diabetes may be controlled 
mainly by means of a balanced diet, although 
drugs may be necessary to stimulate the 
production of insulin. Insulin injections may 
also be required. It is important, especially for 
those taking drugs, to eat at regular intervals  
to prevent hypoglycemia (too little glucose  
in the blood).
Homeopathic medicine
Constitutional homeopathic treatment for 
diabetes is recommended in support of 
conventional measures, and is compatible with them. Prescription depends upon specific 
symptoms  (see page 18) , but certain remedies 
have an affinity with the metabolic system. 
Phosphoric ac.  is effective when emotional stress 
has played a part in the onset of diabetes. Silica 
is prescribed for diabetes that has arisen from 
infection; while Tarentula  is used for diabetes 
linked to anxiety or grief. Argentum nit. , 
Lycopodium , Phosphorus , Plumbum met ., 
Theridion , and Uranium nit.  are other 
constitutional remedies often used in the 
treatment of diabetes.
Remedies for acute symptoms include 
Phosphoric ac. , when diabetes is worse for 
nervous exhaustion; Uranium nit.  for digestive 
upset, great weight loss, weakness, and 
incontinence; Argentum nit. , when the usual 
symptoms of diabetes are accompanied by 
swollen ankles and there is apprehension; and 
Silica , when the person complains of cold, 
sweaty , smelly feet, and a lack of stamina.
Lifestyle
Carbohydrate intake should be carefully 
monitored, and the diet should include plenty 
of legumes as long as they do not upset the 
bowel. A nutritionist can advise about vitamin 
and mineral supplements. The loss of excess 
weight, stress-management techniques, and 
regular exercise will all help diabetes sufferers. 
Smoking is inadvisable.DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
The most common form of diabetes, diabetes mellitus, occurs if there is 
diminished action of insulin due to decreased secretion from the pancreas  
(T ype 1 diabetes) or a reduction in the effectiveness of secreted insulin (T ype 2 
diabetes). This prevents the glucose needed for energy production being taken 
from the blood, so that blood-sugar levels rise. DIABETESCASE HISTORY
Sam was a 61-year-old, retired policeman, 
working part-time as a delivery driver. He 
had been diagnosed two years before his 
consultation with diabetes mellitus, 
revealed by a routine urine sample. He 
had responded fairly well to a diabetic 
diet, but still had high blood sugar levels. 
He complained of anxiety, poor memory 
and concentration, anger, confusion,  
a lack of purpose in his life, depression,  
and tiredness.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Sam came to the US in his thirties, having 
been born in India and lived in Africa. He 
was used to responsibility and pleased with 
his achievements, but felt burned out. He 
now wanted to put himself ﬁrst, but he 
feared poverty. He felt his wife was not his 
equal intellectually, and they argued  
a lot. Sam was tidy but not fastidious.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Sam had a sweet tooth and liked spicy 
foods. He was often very thirsty since his 
blood sugar levels had been brought under 
control, and he passed large quantities  
of urine.
GENERAL DETAILS
As well as mental tension, Sam had tension 
in the back of his skull. He had lower back 
pain that was worse for stress, and he 
suffered sudden losses of energy. He 
preferred warm, damp weather.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Sam was advised to eat unreﬁned 
carbohydrate snacks little and often, and 
to avoid caffeine and alcohol. He felt 
better for this, but still had sugar in his 
urine. He was prescribed Nux vomica , 
which aggravated him initially, then made 
him feel better. He soon became irritable 
and depressed, however. The remedy was 
repeated twice, after which he had more 
energy and felt less irritable. China  was 
tried because of Sam’s history of malaria 
while in Africa, but to little effect. 
Sulphuric ac.  seemed to help him most, 
especially with the restlessness and 
irritation that he experienced on exposure 
to pollution while driving. When last seen, 
Sam had detected no sugar in his urine for 
several months.CAUTION
• If a person with diabetes and taking insulin 
develops a sudden loss of energy, hunger, 
perspiration, dizziness, weakness, headache, 
irritability, slurred speech, or pins and 
needles, or is unsteady (hypoglycemia), 
administer sugar or glucose immediately  
and call a doctor. If the person loses 
consciousness, place them in a safe position 
(see page 270)  and call 911 .
• If, despite treatment, there is increased 
urine production, great thirst, and loss of 
energy (hyperglycemia), see a doctor.

192 •
The skin is the body’s outermost boundary  
and, in effect, its largest organ, accounting for 
16 percent of total body weight. It is shed and 
renewed at a rate of 1 oz (25 g) a month. The 
skin protects the body by waterproofing it, 
reacting to sunlight, regulating temperature,  
and providing a barrier to invading organisms. 
It also supplies the brain with a range of sensory 
information. Skin problems often result from 
regulatory imbalances (acne rosacea and 
psoriasis) or allergy (eczema).
The skeleton is an extensive framework of 
bones, attached to which are skeletal muscles. 
Together they coordinate the body’s movements. 
Individual bones move against each other by 
means of joints. The skeleton also provides 
support and protection for some of the body’s 
most important organs, such as the brain, spinal 
cord, heart, and lungs. Diseases of the skeleton 
often result from degeneration of joints 
(osteoarthritis) or autoimmune problems 
(rheumatoid arthritis).SERIOUS AILMENTS
SKIN & BONES
The skin and bones are important components of the body’s basic support 
systems. The skin keeps the internal parts within the body and protects 
them from the environment, while the skeletal system, among other 
functions, provides a strong, mobile framework that enables the body  
to move and protects internal organs.
The body’s support systems
STRUCTURE OF SKIN The skin has two main layers. 
The epidermis consists of flat, dead, or dying cells, 
which waterproof the skin and protect it from 
infection. These surface cells are continuously shed 
and replaced from below. The underlying dermis is 
where cells are created. Here there are blood 
vessels, nerves, muscles, sensory cells, sweat 
glands, sebaceous glands, and hair follicles.Epidermis
Dermis Hair folliclePore
Sweat glandSYSTEM OF JOIN TS A joint is 
where two bones meet. There 
are different types of joints 
throughout the body, depending 
on their location. Most joints are 
mobile (see diagram, below) . 
They are versatile and lubricated 
so that bone surfaces slide over 
each other easily, facilitating body 
movement. Other joints are less 
movable, or fixed, and their  
main function is to provide 
support for the body.Shoulder is ball-and-socket joint, which 
allows movement backward, forward, 
sideways, and rotationally
Elbow
Hip
Fingers have hinge joints, the 
simplest kind of joint, which 
allows bending and straightening
HOW JOINTS WORK Joints such as the knee—the 
largest joint in the body—are mobile joints. Their 
bone surfaces are covered with smooth cartilage to 
reduce friction during movement. Each mobile joint 
lies within a capsule lined with a membrane that 
secretes a lubricating fluid—the synovial fluid. 
Mobile joints are surrounded by ligaments that 
support them and prevent too much movement.MusclePatella
Articular 
cartilage
Internal 
ligaments
Joint 
capsuleSynovial 
membrane
Synovial 
fluid
Femur
External 
ligaments
FibulaMuscle
Patella
Knee 
(see 
diagram, 
left)Femur
Fibula
Ankle
Toe jointsSebaceous glandWrist

•193
Symptoms
• Flushed cheeks and nose, possibly induced  
by drinking hot drinks or alcohol, eating spicy 
foods, or entering a warm room.
• Possible permanent redness of the skin  
and small, pus-filled spots that are similar to 
mild acne.
Causes
The causes of rosacea are largely unknown,  
but oral contraceptive drugs and corticosteroid 
ointments prescribed for other skin conditions, 
such as eczema, may precipitate it. Stress may 
exacerbate the condition. In women rosacea 
often strikes during or after menopause, when 
the condition is most probably linked to 
hormonal changes affecting the sebaceous 
glands in the skin.
Conventional care
The usual treatment for rosacea is a long  
course of tetracyclines. These are very effective 
in suppressing the small, pus-filled spots, but 
they do not tend to make much difference to 
the underlying red discoloration. Being 
antibiotics, they may harm the bacterial flora  
of the intestine, necessitating the subsequent  
use of acidophilic supplements.
Homeopathic medicine
A homeopathic practitioner will take a full 
medical history , paying particular attention  
to the onset and progression of rosacea and its 
possible triggers, followed by an examination  
of affected areas.
Many remedies are suitable for the 
constitutional treatment of symptoms of rosacea  
(see page 18) , but prescription will depend upon 
the individual. Among the remedies often 
chosen are Carbo veg. , for when blood stagnates 
in capillaries, resulting in poor oxygen supply  
to facial tissue; and Lachesis  for hemorrhaging 
that allows infection to set in. Psorinum  is 
prescribed for problems of the sebaceous 
glands; and Rhus tox.  is given for infection such 
as that forming boils. Homeopathic remedies 
prescribed for acute symptoms include Belladonna , for the early stages of rosacea,  
when the face is red, dry , and burning hot;  
and Arsen. alb. , when the skin is flaky and  
scaly , there is restlessness, and the condition  
is better for warmth generally as well as for 
warm compresses applied to the affected areas.  
Viola tri.  may be prescribed if rosacea is mainly 
concentrated on the chin, and the urine  
smells like cat urine; while Silica is given  
if the main problem is pustules that remain  
for long periods of time. Calc. phos.  is prescribed 
for rosacea that is found mainly on the nose, 
and is accompanied by many pimples; and  
Kali. brom.  is given when the forehead and 
cheeks in particular are flushed, and there  
are itchy pustules.
Lifestyle
Specifically , if rosacea is associated with vaginal 
discharge and general fatigue in women, a yeast- 
and sugar-free diet accompanied by acidophilic 
supplements is advisable. Naturopaths—those 
who promote health and natural healing by 
means of diet, exercise, and complementary 
care—believe that rosacea develops as a result of 
both stress and an inappropriate diet, especially 
one that is high in animal protein and fat, 
refined carbohydrates, and dairy products. 
Following a mainly fish and vegetarian diet  
for one month may be beneficial. Alcohol and 
coffee are best avoided. If stress is an aggravating 
factor, relaxation techniques, yoga, meditation, 
or tai chi may help on a daily basis. Any 
emotional problems should be solved, with  
the help of a counselor if necessary . Local 
applications of calendula solution or tea-tree oil 
may alleviate the condition (10 drops calendula 
mother tincture to 1.25 quarts [liters] cooled, 
boiled water, or 2 drops tea-tree oil).SKIN & BONES
Rosacea, or acne rosacea, resembles mild adolescent acne in some respects, but  
its main feature is flushing of the skin. It is most common among middle-aged 
women. In serious cases in elderly men, it may lead to a bulbous swelling of the 
nose called rhinophyma. Rosacea tends to last for between five and ten years 
before disappearing.ROSACEACASE HISTORY
William was a 57-year-old retired blacksmith. 
He came to the consultation with a ten-year 
history of rosacea. It had started with  
small spots above the eyebrows, but had 
progressed to boils and redness of the 
whole face. He had been prescribed an 
antibiotic, oxytetracycline, which upset  
his bowels, and then another form of 
tetracycline to be applied (as a solution)  
to the affected areas.
PERSONAL DETAILS
As well as a red face and several small boils 
on his nose, William had a coated tongue,  
a slightly swollen upper lip, and a strong 
body odor. He described himself as 
superstitious and a perfectionist. He 
became depressed easily, and worried 
constantly about his health.
FOOD PREFERENCES
William had a huge appetite, even needing 
to eat in the middle of the night, but he 
never put on any weight. He liked beer  
and acidic foods, but not meat. He had  
a great thirst, but his skin condition was 
exacerbated by drinking coffee.
GENERAL DETAILS
William felt the cold greatly, and wore a lot 
of clothes even in summer. He hated winter 
and loved hot, sunny weather. Despite this, 
he had a tendency to feel very hot in bed, 
and did not like becoming overheated from 
physical exertion.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
William was prescribed Sulphur ,  
which helped the rosacea initially.  
The condition deteriorated, however,  
if he stopped using tetracycline. He was 
then given Psorinum  in increasing 
potencies over a period of about 
18 months, and this produced a 
remarkable improvement in his condition. 
He was able to stop applying tetracycline, 
and eventually to take Psorinum  on the odd 
occasion only if he felt the rosacea might 
be about to ﬂare up again. Interestingly, 
William had also suffered from irritable 
bowel syndrome for about 40 years, and 
this condition also improved for taking 
Psorinum.  When last heard of, William  
had been completely clear of symptoms  
of rosacea for four years.CAUTION
• If the nose is swelling, consult a doctor.
• If an acnelike rash develops while taking 
steroids, either orally or in an ointment, 
consult a doctor to discuss discontinuation.

194 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
Symptoms
• Red, itchy , and scaly skin.
• Inflamed areas, possibly with small, red 
pimples that weep or bleed if scratched.
• Possible blistering of skin.
• Possible cracked and painful skin.
• Possible issue of pus if broken skin  
becomes infected.
Causes
Atopic eczema occurs in people with a genetic 
tendency to develop allergies. Contact eczema—
or contact dermatitis (some forms of eczema 
are also known as dermatitis)—is caused by 
touching items to which the body is sensitive, 
such as fabric, metal, or plants. Seborrheic 
dermatitis may be inherited but is not linked 
to allergy . Of unknown cause, it produces 
flakiness and itchiness on the face, scalp, and 
other hairy areas, and may be worse for stress. 
Detergent dermatitis afflicts those using 
cleaning products. Varicose eczema tends to  
be associated with inefficient circulation in the 
legs, although the precise cause is unknown.
Conventional care
With atopic eczema, eliminating certain foods 
or food additives from the diet may identify 
an allergy . With contact eczema, patch tests 
are useful. Antihistamine drugs can reduce 
irritation, while antibiotics are prescribed for 
infection. Corticosteroid ointments inhibit 
inflammation, but they should be used only 
when the risk of infection or irritation is so 
severe that it prevents sleep, thus increasing 
stress and exacerbating the eczema. 
Moisturizing ointments may be beneficial.
Homeopathic medicine
A full medical history of the condition,  
any family history of allergy , and possible  
triggers will be studied by a homeopath.  
A person’s psychological makeup, food 
preferences, and environmental factors  
will also be investigated.
Constitutional remedies will be largely 
determined by an individual’s symptoms   
(see page 18) . Calc. sulph.  is indicated for skin eruptions that easily become infected; while 
Dulcamara  is effective for thickening of the 
epidermis. Graphites  is associated with sticky 
fluid exuded from inflamed patches that  
dry out to become rough and hard; and  
Rhus tox.  is also prescribed for infected skin. 
Other remedies commonly prescribed are 
Arsen. alb. , Baryta mur . , Calc. carb. , Hepar 
sulph. , and Sulphur .
Local remedies prescribed for acute 
conditions include Psorinum , if the skin is 
broken and very sensitive, and the slightest 
scratch becomes infected, forming a green 
crust that burns and itches, then cracks and 
bleeds. Oleander  is given for skin that is very 
dry , sensitive, and itchy so that the slightest 
friction results in soreness, and scratching 
causes the skin to bleed and weep. Mezereum  
is prescribed for itchy , thick scabs, beneath 
which there is pus, and which are worse for 
warm baths. Cicuta  is used for eczema that is 
worse on the face and hands, feels hot to the 
touch, and may include pustules.
Lifestyle
Rubber gloves should be worn for most 
household tasks, with cotton gloves inside 
them if there is sensitivity to rubber. As well 
as known irritants, substances and situations 
best avoided include colored toilet paper, 
antiperspirants, false nails, dehumidified air, 
and rapid temperature changes. The skin 
may benefit from lukewarm oatmeal herbal 
baths and cold milk compresses, but it 
should always be dried thoroughly . Clothes 
should be rinsed well after washing. The diet 
should ideally include plenty of fish and 
vegetables, while amounts of animal protein, 
fats, refined carbohydrates, and dairy 
products should all be reduced.Local inflammation of the skin, or eczema, may be accompanied by itching, blistering, 
and oozing, may be associated with an allergic reaction, but the cause is often 
unknown. Childhood eczema, which usually occurs in the flexures behind a knee  
or in the bend of an elbow, usually clears up by the time the child reaches puberty .SEVERE ECZEMACASE HISTORY
Five-year-old Alex had experienced eczema 
for two years. The inﬂammation was 
widespread, and although it came and 
went on most parts of the body, it was 
constantly on his forehead. His arms and 
legs were worst affected, with some 
scarring. He was on hydrocortisone, and 
had been prescribed antibiotics for skin 
infections on two occasions. The eczema 
worsened when Alex was ill.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Alex was born in Hong Kong. His eczema 
started about the time that his baby 
brother was born. The family then returned 
to the US, the father changed careers, and 
the family moved again before life settled 
down. His mother described Alex as lively, 
excitable, loving, and nonaggressive. He 
was good with his hands, and liked taking 
things apart. He loved attention, and was 
sometimes jealous of his younger brother.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Alex loved most foods, especially fatty  
and sweet ones, and those with strong 
ﬂavors, which was unusual for a child  
of his age.
GENERAL DETAILS
Alex tended to grab everything and put it in 
his mouth, behavior characteristic of a child 
younger than he was. His itching was worse 
for bathing, or if he was overheated or 
overexcited. The itching was also worse at 
night, and Alex had many a sleepless night 
as a result of his condition. His skin was 
always dry, and bled if he scratched it.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
When ﬁrst seen, Alex’s skin was slightly 
infected. He was given Silica  for the 
infection, and his mother was advised  
to bathe Alex’s skin with a solution of 
calendula and hypericum, and apply 
calendula ointment. Alex’s eczema 
symptoms and general picture indicated 
Sulphur , and he was prescribed a variety  
of potencies of this remedy over the next 
eight months. By the end of that time,  
his condition was much improved, and  
he hardly needed to take the Sulphur  at 
all. He was ﬁnally discharged, having  
been totally weaned off his conventional 
drug treatment.CAUTION
• If eczema deteriorates markedly, and 
especially if the skin is broken, inﬂamed, 
and appears to be infected, consult a doctor 
within 48 hours.

•195
Symptoms
• Unsightly patches of flaky skin that  
can occur anywhere on the body , possibly 
with itching.
• Patches are slightly raised and deep pink, 
often overlain with silvery scales.
• Possible pitting of the nails.
• Possible inflammation of the joints.
Causes
There may be a genetic tendency . The basic 
problem with psoriasis is that new skin cells 
form more quickly than usual, causing 
accumulations of living cells. These create 
thickened patches of skin covered with dead, 
flaking cells. The condition varies in severity , 
and may be triggered by infection, particularly 
that caused by the streptococcal bacteria, or  
by drugs such as chloroquine used in the 
treatment of rheumatic pain and malaria. 
Stress or injury may also trigger psoriasis.
Conventional care
In mild cases, light therapy can help up to  
75 percent of those afflicted. It may be 
combined with a psoralen, a substance that 
makes skin more sensitive to light. Exposure 
times should be increased only gradually , and 
soothing, moisturizing ointments should be 
applied. Moderate cases of psoriasis are 
treated with dithranol or coal-tar ointments,  
corticosteroids, or vitamin D analogs. Severe 
cases may be treated with cytotoxic drugs 
such as methotrexate, which retards cell 
division. This may cause serious side-effects 
such as abnormal bleeding or a decreased 
resistance to infection. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs may be used to treat 
psoriasis, but they may cause digestive 
problems, even stomach ulcers.
Homeopathic medicine
A full medical history is obtained and, if there 
is doubt about the diagnosis, skin scrapings 
are taken. In treating psoriasis, great emphasis 
is placed on an individual’s psychological 
makeup, particularly factors that might have triggered the condition, such as stress or 
emotional upset. Environmental factors and 
food preferences are also significant.
The most important criteria in determining 
constitutional prescription are the person’s 
individual symptoms  (see page 18) . Some 
remedies in particular are associated with the 
treatment of psoriasis, however. Arsen. alb.  is 
indicated for dry , rough, and scaly skin; and 
Lycopodium  is effective for dry skin and raw 
areas in the flexures. Sepia  is prescribed for the 
thick crusts that form on the elbows; while 
Staphysagria  is used to treat skin conditions that 
are affected by irritability of the nervous system.
Specific remedies for local problems 
include Sulphur , for dry , red, scaly , itchy 
patches that are worse after a bath; 
Graphites , if the skin behind the ears is 
affected; Petroleum , when the skin is 
extremely dry , and psoriasis is worse in 
winter, with deep, bloody cracks, especially 
on the hands, fingertips, genitals, and 
elbows; and Phytolacca , when there are 
lesions with a purple coloration.
Lifestyle
Reducing stress by means of relaxation 
techniques, meditation, tai chi, or yoga, and 
nutritional therapies can help this condition 
enormously , as can a diet that includes 
plenty of fish and vegetarian sources of 
protein rather than meat and dairy products. 
Refined carbohydrates should be eliminated, 
along with caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco. It 
is advisable to lose excess weight, and make 
sure that the bowel functions well, taking 
extra fiber if necessary , and plenty of water. 
It may be worth using marine oils, such as 
cod-liver oil, for cooking, and avoiding 
foods containing yeast.SKIN & BONES 
This fairly common skin disease consists of inflamed areas that are often covered 
by silvery scales. A chronic condition that flares up at intervals, psoriasis can 
cover a large area, including the face, and can be very disfiguring. It affects  
about two percent of the population in Europe and North America, but is less 
common in other regions.PSORIASISCASE HISTORY
Kate, 22, had been affected by psoriasis 
since she was six. It had worsened in the 
last year following the breakup of a 
relationship. She was taking corticosteroids 
and applying a vitamin-D-based ointment. 
Her skin was inﬂamed and itchy. The 
condition was worse if Kate was tired, and 
often coincided with attacks of tonsillitis.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Kate believed herself to be ambitious,  
but she lacked conﬁdence. She felt as 
though the psoriasis had eaten away  
every part of her body.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Kate had a great thirst and liked very cold 
drinks. She would drink ice-cold milk, which 
was sometimes vomited as soon as it was 
warmed in the stomach. She loved salt, 
acidic and spicy foods, and ice cream. She 
disliked fruits, warm foods and drinks,  
and coffee.
FEARS
Kate had fears of failure, of letting down her 
parents and her friends, of living alone, and 
of thunderstorms.
GENERAL DETAILS
Kate was better for sun, but disliked great 
heat. She felt faint if she put her hands in 
cold water. She was aware of falling 
pressure before thunderstorms, and 
sometimes suffered headaches. She 
disliked mornings and evenings, and was 
better for catnapping, eating, and massage.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Kate was given Phosphorus  and her skin 
condition started to improve. She began to 
take life more easily, and sleep more. In 
fact, she felt that the Phosphorus  relaxed 
her so much that all she wanted to do was 
sleep. Over 12 months she weaned herself 
off the corticosteroids, and reduced the 
application of cream to once a week. She no 
longer suffered from recurrent sore throats. 
Kate’s psoriasis returned after a year, when 
she had a cancer scare and started to work 
in the city, with the stress of commuting. 
She was again prescribed Phosphorus  and 
the psoriasis settled down. It still ﬂares up  
if Kate is under stress, but Phosphorus  is 
usually effective.CAUTION
• If symptoms show no improvement after 
two weeks of homeopathic remedies and 
lifestyle changes, see a doctor.

196 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
Symptoms
• Stiffness and pain in the affected joints.
• Possible swelling of the joints, most 
commonly weight-bearing joints such as 
those in the hips, knees, and spine.
• Weakness and loss of bulk in the muscles 
surrounding the affected joints if they are not 
used regularly .
• Possible deformation of affected joints.
Causes
The degeneration of cartilage covering the  
ends of bones occurs with age or as a result  
of injury or overuse. The bone ends touch, 
causing them to thicken and thus restrict  
joint movement. This results in inflammation.  
There may also be outgrowths on a bone called 
osteophytes, which increase the pain and 
stiffness, and may press on blood vessels and 
nerves. The early onset of osteoarthritis may 
be the result of a congenital joint deformity .
Conventional care
Diagnosis is usually possible following 
examination, but can be confirmed by X-ray . 
Conventional treatment is largely symptomatic, 
using painkillers and noncustodial anti-
inflammatory drugs. Steroids are sometimes 
injected into the joint. If a joint is badly worn, 
it may need surgical replacement with an 
artificial joint. Hip-replacement operations,  
for example, have a high success rate, but  
need to be repeated after 20 to 30 years.  
If replacement is not an option, the joint  
may be fused to prevent pain.
Homeopathic medicine
Homeopathic treatment of osteoarthritis is 
mostly localized, depending on the joint 
affected, the nature of the pain, and other 
symptoms. Constitutional treatment may  
be required if there is a genetic tendency . 
Emotional or environmental factors will be less 
significant than in other serious ailments, since 
osteoarthritis is a mechanical failure, although 
stress makes any symptoms less bearable. The 
choice of constitutional remedy will depend upon an individual’s symptoms  (see page 18) , 
but remedies commonly used include Apis, 
which is prescribed for inflammation of 
synovial membranes and overproduction  
of synovial fluid; and Silica , which is given  
for the destruction of bone and enlarged 
bursae (fluid-filled pads that cushion pressure 
points near a joint). Calc. carb.  is indicated  
for osteoarthritis associated with growths on 
the bone; and Causticum  is prescribed for 
inflammation of the joints leading to deformity . 
Other constitutional remedies used include 
Kali. carb. , Lycopodium , Merc. sol. , Nat. mur . , 
Pulsatilla , Sepia , and Sulphur .
Remedies given for acute symptoms  
include Aconite , for shooting pains in a joint 
accompanied by numbness and tingling; and 
Belladonna , for joints that become red, swollen, 
and shiny quickly , and are unbearably painful 
if jarred. Bryonia  is prescribed for joints that 
are red, swollen, and hot, with the least 
movement causing agonizing pain; and Ledum  
is given for joints that feel cold, are swollen, 
make cracking noises on moving, and are 
better for cold compresses.
Lifestyle
A diet that is high in alkaline-forming foods 
and low in acid-forming ones is beneficial. This 
means more fish and vegetarian protein and 
less caffeine, sugar, citrus fruits, wheat, and 
dairy products. Losing excess weight will 
relieve pressure on the joints. Smoking is 
inadvisable. Exercise such as cycling or walking 
is beneficial; well-cushioned shoes should be 
worn. Sleeping on a firm bed and catnaps 
during the day are also helpful. Yoga may 
relieve stress, and warm compresses may help 
to alleviate pain. Dependency on tranquilizers, 
painkillers, or sleeping pills should be avoided.Osteoarthritis is a degenerative disease of the joints that breaks down cartilage, 
causing restriction of movement and sometimes pain. It has been estimated that  
in some parts of the developed world, up to 90 percent of people over 40 have 
osteoarthritis in one or more joints. Severe osteoarthritis affects three times as 
many women as men.OSTEOARTHRITISCASE HISTORY
Doris, 60, had suffered from osteoarthritis 
for six years. It had started in the right wrist, 
then developed in the left. An X-ray had 
revealed bone changes in the thumb joint. 
Doris was not aware of any precipitative 
factors. She was unable to take 
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs 
because they upset her stomach.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Doris had been a dental technician before 
getting married and having three children, 
the eldest of whom had died in a trafﬁc 
accident. Doris was generally happy and 
contented, although she often felt restless, 
and worried constantly about her other  
two children, even though they had long 
since left the family home. She had a  
great interest in the arts and  
practiced meditation.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Doris had a desire for mayonnaise, milk, 
coffee, and wine. She disliked pineapple, 
vinegar, coconut, and some ﬁsh.
GENERAL DETAILS
Doris hated cold, damp weather, which 
made her condition worse. Her joints would 
seize up during sleep and when at rest, 
were painful when they were ﬁrst moved, 
then better for continuous motion. Doris 
also had a red-tipped tongue.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
First of all Doris was put on an alkaline 
diet for arthritis, but to no avail. There was 
a family history of allergy and respiratory 
problems, so she was given Tuberculinum  
on a weekly basis, and Rhus tox.  three 
times daily for the arthritis. On this regimen 
there was a slow improvement, but Doris 
then developed catarrh and sinusitis. As 
the catarrh continued, however, her wrist 
pain diminished until she could unscrew 
the lid of a jar, a task that she had been 
unable to do for years. She continued to 
take Tuberculinum  until the catarrh cleared 
up. She was not seen for a couple of 
years, when pain recurred in her right 
thumb. She was prescribed Rhus tox.  
again, which was effective. When Doris 
was seen nine years later for another 
complaint, she reported that her joints 
were ﬁne.CAUTION
• If the pain suddenly becomes more 
severe, or additional joints become affected, 
consult a doctor within a week.

•197
Symptoms
• Mild fever, muscle aches and pains, loss  
of appetite, and weight loss may precede  
the main symptoms.
• Pain and stiffness—mainly in the small 
joints of the hands and feet, but also in the 
wrists, neck, ankles, and knees—that may 
start suddenly and are worse in the morning 
and for rest.
• Possible exacerbation of symptoms  
during menstruation.
• Possible rheumatoid nodules beneath  
the skin.
• Possible association with Raynaud’s disease 
or anemia.
• Possible deformation of joints, fluid-filled 
swelling around joints, and inflammation of 
the tendon sheaths.
Causes
It is not known why the immune  
system should start to attack the joints. 
There may be a genetic tendency; some  
people with a certain tissue type may  
be prone to rheumatoid arthritis. The  
result is that the linings of joint capsules 
become inflamed. The inflammation 
spreads to other parts of the joint  
and even the bones themselves. The  
process may be triggered by infection, 
environmental pollutants, stress, or  
taking certain drugs.
Conventional care
Diagnosis is confirmed by X-ray and a 
blood test that can identify a “rheumatoid 
factor.” Conventional treatment focuses  
on reducing inflammation with  
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and 
penicillamine or sulfasalazine injections. 
Failing these, immunosuppressant  
drugs such as steroids or azathioprine  
will retard the autoimmune response. 
Physiotherapy can relieve muscle spasms 
and stiffness, and splints help to reduce 
pain in the hands and wrists. Replacement 
surgery may be necessary if a joint  
has been damaged.Homeopathic medicine
Homeopathy considers rheumatoid arthritis to 
be a complex condition. A genetic tendency 
may be addressed by antimiasmatic treatment  
(see page 20) . Diet and lifestyle will be studied 
closely , as will stress or psychological factors  
as potential triggers of the disease. The choice 
of remedy will largely be determined by 
individual symptoms  (see page 18) . Aurum met.  
is indicated for destruction of the bone; and 
Bryonia  is used for inflammation and the 
overproduction of synovial fluid. Calc. phos.  
affects the maintenance of bones, and is  
given if they are soft, thin, and brittle. 
Causticum  is prescribed for inflammation  
of the joints leading to deformity . Iodum ,  
Kali. bich. , Lycopodium , and Medorrhinum   
are also commonly used.
Local remedies include Rhus tox. , when  
there is pain on waking and in cold, damp 
conditions; and Colchicum , for hot, stiff joints, 
and pain that moves from joint to joint and is 
agonizing at night or for touch. Iodum  is used 
for joints that feel tight and pain that is worse 
at night, when the bones are also affected; and 
Spigelia , for tearing pain near the joints as if a 
knife were scraping along the bones.
Lifestyle
A high-alkaline diet is beneficial, as are 
evening primrose oil, antioxidants, green-
lipped mussel extract, brazil nuts, and the 
wearing of a copper bracelet. Regular but 
moderate exercise that does not exert pressure 
on weight-bearing joints is advisable. 
Swimming is ideal, preferably in a heated 
pool. Catnaps, or periods of rest with the eyes 
closed, are beneficial.SKIN & BONES
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease, in which the body’s immune 
system attacks the joints. There is a juvenile form, but the disease usually 
starts in early adulthood or middle age. This form of arthritis affects about 
two percent of the world’s population, and afflicts more women then men.RHEUMATOID ARTHRITISCASE HISTORY
Penelope, a 54-year-old former dental 
technician, had developed arthritis 
gradually in her feet, especially the toes 
and ankles, four years before her 
consultation. A few months before she was 
seen, it had spread to her ﬁngers, an 
alarming development since Penelope was 
a piano player. She had been prescribed 
anti-inﬂammatory drugs, but they had made 
her nauseous. She had tried acupuncture 
and Bryonia , which had helped slightly.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Penelope was a pleasant, intelligent woman, 
who liked the arts and reading. Her main 
fear was of feathers. She described herself 
as emotionally closed, and disliked 
sympathy, which made her feel sorry for 
herself. She had a happy marriage, but her 
mother had lived in Penelope’s home for  
30 years after her husband’s death.  
Having become ill about ﬁve years 
previously, her mother had moved into  
a nursing home a few months before 
Penelope’s homeopathic consultation.
FOOD PREFERENCES
There were no particular foods that 
Penelope strongly liked or disliked, although 
she did prefer salty rather than sweet foods.
GENERAL DETAILS
Penelope was worse on ﬁrst moving in the 
morning, but did not appear to be affected 
by any particular weather conditions.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
The deterioration of Penelope’s health 
seemed to be closely linked to events  
in her mother’s life. Penelope had not 
grieved properly for her father, however, 
and this increased the emotional impact  
of her mother’s experiences, and took  
its toll on Penelope’s immune system.  
She was prescribed Nat. mur.  in a high 
potency and Rhus tox  speciﬁcally for  
her joints. One month on, she had  
stopped taking anti-inﬂammatories,  
and felt better for having dealt with  
the loss of her father. Her joint pain  
had reduced to such an extent that  
she was teaching the piano again.  
Two years later she reported only the 
slightest twinges of pain, which  
responded to Rhus. tox.CAUTION
• If a joint becomes deformed, see a doctor.
• If there are breathing difﬁculties or chest 
pains, see a doctor immediately.
• If the eyes are dry and there are lumps in 
the neck, under the arms, or in the groin, 
see a doctor as soon as possible.

198 •
Reproduction depends upon the efficient 
functioning of both the female and male 
systems. This is impaired by physiological 
problems such as blockages, which are  
either congenital or the result of infection  
or scarring and which may give rise to 
infertility; growths such as fibroids; and 
malformation such as an enlarged prostate 
gland. The reproductive process may also  
be interrupted by hormonal imbalances.
Female reproduction
The vagina receives sperm from the penis  
of the male during sexual intercourse.  
The sperm pass through the opening of the 
cervix into the uterus on their way to find  
an egg that has been expelled from an ovary .  
A fertilized egg travels down the fallopian 
tube and, after many cell divisions, embeds 
itself in the wall of the uterus. For the first 
eight weeks of its development it is called  
an embryo; thereafter, it is a fetus.
If no fertilization occurs, the lining of the 
uterus, or endometrium, is shed during 
menstruation. This occurs about every 
28 days. The menstrual cycle is under the  
control of hormones produced by the 
pituitary gland in the brain.
Male reproduction
Male sex cells, or sperm, are produced in the 
testes. These are outside the body so that the 
sperm are kept cool. From the testes, sperm 
travel up a narrow tube, the vas deferens,  
in which they are joined by secretions from 
the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland  
to create semen. During sexual intercourse, 
semen is ejaculated into the vagina of the 
female. Erectile tissue in the penis expands  
as a result of increased blood flow during 
sexual arousal, allowing the insertion of the 
erect penis into the vagina during intercourse 
and the emission of semen. Once in the 
vagina, sperm “swim” by means of long, 
whiplike tails. Each sperm head contains 
genetic material.SERIOUS AILMENTS
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS
The urge to procreate is one of the most basic instincts 
driving human beings. Reproduction involves the 
fertilization of an egg from the ovary of the female by  
a sperm from the male, and the development of a fetus  to term. Contraception has facilitated greater control over 
childbearing than ever before. In parallel, the science of 
assisted reproduction has developed as couples delay having 
children until their fertility may have begun to decline.
How the system works
FEMALE REPRODUCTION  An egg shed by 
an ovary is swept up by the pronglike ends 
of the fallopian tube. A fertilized egg will 
pass down into the uterus and embed itself 
in the lining. The uterus expands greatly to 
accommodate a developing fetus.
Ovary Fallopian tube
Uterus
LOCATION OF SYSTEM The female 
reproductive system lies inside the 
pelvic cavity, surrounded and protected 
by the pelvic bones. This space is wider 
than in the male to accommodate the 
enlarging uterus in pregnancy.Uterus
Fallopian 
tube
Bladder
CervixVagina
Ovary contains millions 
of follicles from birthFollicle is cavity in 
which egg develops
MALE REPRODUCTION  During sexual 
intercourse sperm are propelled by means 
of muscle contractions from the testes along 
the vas deferens to the ejaculatory duct. At 
ejaculation, semen is propelled along the 
urethra and out of the penis.
Vas deferens Bladder
Penis Scrotum
LOCATION OF SYSTEM The male  
reproductive organs are not within the 
pelvic cavity. In fact, they lie outside 
the body altogether—in the scrotum.Bladder
Vas deferens
Urethra
Penis
Scrotum
Testis contains coiled 
tubes that produce 
thousands of spermProstate 
glandEjaculatory 
ductSeminal 
vesicle

•199
Symptoms
• Possibly no symptoms at all if a fibroid is 
very small.
• Possible heavy or lengthy menstrual periods 
that may cause anemia if a fibroid is large.
• Symptoms of cystitis if a large fibroid 
presses on the bladder.
• Backaches or constipation if a large fibroid 
presses on the colon.
• Possible difficulty in conceiving, 
miscarriage, pain during pregnancy , or 
problems during labor if there is a large 
fibroid in the uterine cavity .
• Severe pain if a fibroid stalk becomes 
twisted, cutting off its blood supply .
Causes
Fibroids are growths in smooth muscle  
and connective tissue. It is believed that they 
grow in response to estrogen stimulation or as  
an abnormal response to normal levels of 
estrogen. They can be caused by taking oral 
contraceptives, and tend to enlarge during 
pregnancy . As a result of the decrease in 
estrogen levels during the menopause, 
fibroids shrink and eventually disappear.
Conventional care
Small, symptom-free fibroids are often 
discovered during routine gynecological 
examinations or ultrasound scanning. Small 
fibroids do not require treatment, but they  
are usually monitored. The conventional 
treatment for fibroids that cause pain involves 
the removal of the fibroid (myomectomy), 
or—especially if there is heavy bleeding—the 
removal of the uterus (hysterectomy).
Homeopathic medicine
Homeopathic treatment aims to correct 
imbalances in estrogen levels or the body’s 
extraordinary response to normal estrogen 
levels. A constitutional approach will address 
the interaction between the ovaries and the 
pituitary gland. The choice of remedy will 
depend upon an individual’s particular 
symptoms  (see page 18) . Calc. carb.  is used for the treatment of growths on stalks that project 
from the uterine wall. For problems that may  
be associated with fibroids, Lachesis  is indicated 
when the circulation of blood in the uterus 
leads to bleeding into surrounding muscle. 
Phosphorous  is used for the overdevelopment  
of muscle, and Sepia is associated with 
inflammation of the uterus and prolapse 
(displacement of the uterus).
Remedies may be prescribed specifically in 
an attempt to shrink a fibroid. These include 
Calc. iod. , when fibroids are small and there  
is a profuse, yellow vaginal discharge; and 
Fraxinus , when the uterus is swollen and 
accompanied by an urge to bear down, and 
there are painful cramps and a watery , brown 
vaginal discharge during menstruation. Silica  
is used when menstrual periods are heavy , 
possibly with intermittent bleeding, and the 
body feels ice-cold; and Aurum mur .  is often 
prescribed for a swollen, painful uterus with 
spasmodic vaginal contractions.
Lifestyle
A diet that is high in fish and vegetarian sources 
of protein and raw vegetables, and low in meat, 
dairy products, refined carbohydrates, caffeine, 
and alcohol is advisable, especially if the 
fibroids are associated with heavy bleeding. 
Half-an-hour’s moderate exercise a day , with 
care not to overexert, is recommended. There  
is some evidence that progesterones extracted 
from Mexican yams and applied to the skin  
as a cream may counteract the effects of 
estrogen and therefore shrink the fibroids. This 
product is not always readily available  
over the counter, however.REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS
Fibroids are benign (noncancerous) tumors in the uterus. In the developed  
world, they occur in about 20 percent of women over 30, mainly between  
35 and 45. A fibroid may grow steadily in the wall of the uterus, or project into 
the uterine cavity , in which case it will be attached to the wall by a stalk. Fibroids 
shrink after menopause.FIBROIDSCASE HISTORY
Natasha, 35, had emigrated from the  
former USSR ten years previously with her 
husband. She had two children. Before her 
consultation, a plum-sized ﬁbroid had been 
revealed by a checkup following a pap 
smear. Natasha complained of heavy 
periods with a black discharge two days 
before the onset of menstruation.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Natasha was an anxious person who 
worried about her health and that of her 
children, death, the future, and being 
deserted by her husband. She was 
dissatisﬁed, restless, fastidious, and 
always rushing. She dreamed of being in 
quicksand or drowning. She would awake  
in panic at around 1 a.m.
FOOD PREFERENCES
A stomach problem diagnosed as a hiatus 
hernia made Natasha vomit at night. She 
loved sweet, salty, fatty, and acidic foods, 
but at times completely lost her appetite. 
Milk, coffee, spicy foods, chocolate, and  
too much fat upset her digestion.
GENERAL DETAILS
Natasha felt the cold greatly and loved hot 
weather. She liked hot compresses on her 
stomach during menstruation. She was 
worse for exertion and between midnight 
and 2 a.m., and hated tobacco smoke.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Natasha was given Arsen. alb. , and within  
a few days felt more relaxed. Her period 
was a week early, with the discharge as 
before, but it was less heavy than usual. 
She was then put on a diet low in reﬁned 
carbohydrates and free of caffeine. This 
made her feel weak but generally better.  
Her next period occurred at the right time, 
with no discharge, but it was still heavy. 
Within the next couple of months, normal 
menstruation was restored with the 
prescription of Solidago . Two months  
later at a checkup, Natasha’s gynecologist 
reported that the ﬁbroid had reduced to  
the size of a small bean. After two years, 
Natasha developed benign breast lumps, 
which were treated effectively with 
Sulphur.  Following a subsequent 
gynecological check-up, the ﬁbroid was 
reported to have disappeared.CAUTION
• If there is severe pain in the lower 
abdomen, see a doctor immediately.
• If a ﬁbroid is causing abdominal swelling 
comparable with that in the twelfth week of 
pregnancy, and the person is not approaching 
menopause, removal may be necessary.

200 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
Symptoms
• Thick, white discharge from the vagina, 
possibly with itching and discomfort on 
passing urine. In men, candidiasis causes 
inflammation of the head of the penis.
• Yellowish white, raised patches on the 
lining of the mouth. If the digestive tract  
is affected, symptoms include indigestion, 
nausea, bloating, flatulence, diarrhea, 
constipation, and itching of the anus.
• In babies, inflamed type of diaper rash.
• Other associated symptoms include a skin 
rash, aches and pains, recurrent sore throat, 
dizziness, fatigue, blurred vision, and headaches.
Causes
Candida albicans  is normally present in the 
vagina and often in the mouth, but is kept 
under control by bacteria. Some drugs, such as 
antibiotics, interfere with this. Candidiasis may 
flare up if the immune system is compromised, 
as in AIDS, or if there are metabolic problems, 
such as diabetes. Oral contraceptives and 
immunosuppressive and progestogen drugs also 
encourage it to proliferate. Local factors may 
affect its growth  (see Lifestyle ).
Conventional care
Candida albicans  can be identified in the 
mouth or genitals from swabs, but there is as 
yet no definitive test for the digestive tract. It 
is treated with antifungal drugs. These come 
as suppositories for the vagina or as creams 
for applying to the vulva or penis. There are 
oral drops for the mouth.
Homeopathic medicine
Homeopathy is most effective in treating 
candidiasis in the genitals. A practitioner will 
study the reason for the proliferation of the 
bacteria. Choice of constitutional remedy will 
depend upon individual symptoms  (see page 
18), and especially the characteristics of the 
vaginal discharge. Arsen. alb.  is prescribed  
for a burning, offensive-smelling discharge 
associated with inflammation; and Graphites  for 
a profuse, thin, white discharge associated with 
inflammation. Medorrhinum  is given for a fishy-smelling discharge that feels as though it is 
stripping the skin off the vagina; while Merc. sol.  
is indicated for inflammation and bleeding of 
the vagina with a greenish discharge, and for 
inflammation of the penis. Nitric ac.  is used to 
treat blisters and ulcers on the genitals.
Local remedies include Lycopodium , for an 
irritating vaginal discharge that is worse after 
menstruation, with itching and thickening  
of the vulval skin from scratching; and Carbo 
veg., for an offensive-smelling, itchy , greenish, 
burning discharge that is worse for heat,  
and for cracking of the vulva. Kreosotum  is 
prescribed for an offensive, sour-smelling 
discharge that stains underwear, with soreness 
and burning in the vagina; and Nux vomica ,  
for an offensive-smelling discharge, especially 
during pregnancy , that is worse for heat, and  
is associated with frequent urination.
Lifestyle
Drugs known to aggravate the condition  
should be avoided. Candida albicans  thrives  
on sugar, so the diet should be low in refined 
carbohydrates and, if allergy to fungal products 
is suspected, free of yeasts and molds. 
Acidophilic supplements encourage the growth 
of intestinal organisms to keep Candida albicans  
in check: garlic inhibits its growth. Regular 
exercise without overexertion is good.
Both sexual partners should be treated. 
Adequate lubrication during intercourse is 
advisable, using a lubricant if necessary , and 
condoms will prevent the spread of infection. 
The vagina may benefit from an acidic douche 
or the application of live yogurt; an infected 
penis may be treated with calendula ointment. 
Perfumed toiletries are best avoided.Candidiasis, or thrush, is a low-grade infection caused by Candida albicans , a fungus 
that lives in warm, moist conditions, and thrives if the immune system is at a low ebb. 
It mainly affects the vagina, in up to 50 percent of women in the developed world, 
even if there are no symptoms. It may also affect the mouth, digestive tract, and skin.CANDIDIASISCASE HISTORY
Thirty-year-old Sophie had suffered from 
vaginal candidiasis for eight months. She 
was also prone to eczema and urticaria. 
The candidiasis had been brought on by 
taking oral contraceptives, and was better 
for treatment with antifungal drugs, 
although it usually recurred at the end  
of a menstrual period.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Sophie described herself as a worrier.  
She did not dwell on the past, but felt  
angry that she was unable to ﬁnd a part-
time job that ﬁtted in with caring for her  
son. She was ambitious and wanted  
to be a high achiever, but she tended  
to be untidy and disorganized.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Sophie had a large appetite, although she 
did not put on weight. She loved sweet 
foods, the fat on meat, spicy foods, and 
alcohol. Alcohol tended to upset her 
digestion, however. She disliked meat,  
eggs, olives, and chicken.
GENERAL DETAILS
Sophie’s condition was worse for bathing 
and in bed at night. She slept throughout 
the night but woke feeling unrefreshed. She 
disliked heat and felt better in cold weather. 
She often experienced a fall in her level of 
energy at about 11 a.m. or if she had to 
stand for any length of time.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Based on her symptoms, particularly the 
itching, Sophie was prescribed Sulphur , 
and advised to cut down on reﬁned 
carbohydrates, to take acidophilic 
supplements and garlic, and to practice 
relaxation techniques, meditation, yoga,  
or tai chi. After a couple of months of 
treatment, the candidiasis disappeared 
completely and she felt better in herself. 
She resolved the conﬂict regarding her  
work and the care of her son by taking  
a job two days a week and ﬁnding an 
excellent babysitter to look after him.  
Two years later Sophie had another child 
and was not bothered by candidiasis either 
during the pregnancy or after the birth.  
She has kept to a diet that is low in reﬁned 
carbohydrates, but has needed no  
further treatment.CAUTION
• If discharge does not respond to 
treatment or lifestyle changes, and 
especially if it is green and irritating,  
see a doctor within ﬁve days.
• If a diaper rash becomes uncomfortable, 
red, and raw, consult a doctor within 48 hours.

•201
Symptoms
• Inflammation: possibly with tender glands 
under the arms, mild fever (mastitis), cysts 
(fluid-filled growths or swellings), or boils in the 
areola (brown areas surrounding the nipples).
• Benign lump (fibroadenosis): possible 
premenstrual tenderness in the breasts.
• Abscess: increasingly tender breast and 
hard, red, and painful spot, possibly 
accompanied by mild fever and tender  
glands under the arms.
• T umor: a milky discharge (in women  
who are not pregnant or lactating) or a dark 
red discharge from the nipple, possibly 
accompanied by an unusual retraction of  
the nipple or an outbreak of eczema  
around the nipple.
Causes
Inflammation of the breast may be caused by  
a blocked milk duct, or bacteria entering a 
cracked nipple during lactation, or by infection 
from an abscess or from elsewhere in the body . 
Most benign lumps are hormonal in origin.
Conventional care
Mastitis and abscesses are usually treated with 
painkillers and antibiotics. An abscess may be 
surgically incised. Ultrasound, mammography , 
or biopsy are used to investigate lumps. 
Biopsy involves either the removal of the 
lump or the aspiration of fluid in order to 
identify cancerous cells. Discharge from the 
nipples may be investigated using the 
methods above or, in order to identify 
infection, by culturing a sample. Hormone 
levels are also measured.
Homeopathic medicine
A physical examination and investigative tests 
will be carried out, and details taken of a 
woman’s gynecological and obstetric history .  
A homeopath will also study precipitative 
factors affecting her general health—especially 
hormonal balances—in an attempt to identify 
the underlying causes of breast problems. The 
choice of constitutional remedy will depend 
upon individual symptoms  (see page 18) .Silica  is effective for abscesses; while Sulphur  
may be used to treat infection that has 
entered through cracked nipples, causing 
mastitis. Calc. phos.  is prescribed for painful 
breast lumps and swelling; and Conium  is 
used to treat hard tumors. Calc. carb.  and 
Pulsatilla  are indicated for lumps or 
inflammation that occur premenstrually or  
are linked to hormonal imbalances. Other 
remedies include Arnica , Causticum,  and 
Lachesis  for nipple pain; and Graphites  for 
eczema and cracked, blistered nipples.
Local remedies include Belladonna,  when an 
abscess or mastitis is developing and the breast 
is red, heavy , throbbing, and painful on the 
slightest movement; and Bryonia , if a breast is 
hard and painful on the slightest movement. 
Conium  is given for a breast lump causing 
discomfort that is better for firm pressure, or 
for a cyst; and Phytolacca  is prescribed for cysts 
that are tender before and during menstruation.
Lifestyle
Regular self-examination of the breasts is 
very important. It should be done at the 
same time every month, first standing in 
front of a mirror to observe any visual 
changes to the breasts or nipples, then  
lying down to feel any lumps, thickening,  
or tenderness in the breasts or armpits.  
Breast-feeding women with mastitis should 
bathe the affected breast in hot water, then 
breast-feed with the baby positioned lower 
than the affected area of the breast so  
as to drain the area of milk. A fish- and  
vegetable-rich diet with no caffeine is 
advisable for women affected by breast lumps.REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS
The main problems affecting the breasts are inflammation (mastitis), breast lumps, 
and discharges from the nipples. Lumps occur mainly between the ages of 30 and 50, 
and 80 percent are benign. They should all be investigated promptly by a doctor, 
however. Regular self-examination and breast awareness are important for all women.BREAST PROBLEMSCASE HISTORY
Catherine, a 43-year-old former teacher,  
ﬁrst started having mild mastitis after  
a kidney infection. She was prescribed the 
contraceptive pill, which helped. She also 
felt better when pregnant. After a couple  
of miscarriages, however, the mastitis  
got worse. She was given vitamin B6 and  
a hormone regulator, which made the 
condition worse. Catherine had an  
irregular menstrual cycle.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Catherine appeared to be easy-going, but 
inside she was a great worrier, and very 
anxious about what others thought about 
her. A highly sensitive woman, she was 
deeply moved by sad stories. At times  
she felt that she would go mad with pain 
and discomfort.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Catherine had a craving for boiled eggs, 
especially when she was premenstrual or 
pregnant. She also had a desire to eat 
indigestible items, such as chalk, coal,  
and pencils, and had a sweet tooth.
GENERAL DETAILS
Catherine felt the cold very easily, but 
tended to sweat profusely in bed, 
particularly on the back of her head so that 
the pillow would become damp. Her feet 
were often so hot that she had to stick them 
out of the bed during the night. She felt 
worse in cold, northeasterly winds, and 
better when the weather was warm and dry.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Catherine was prescribed a variety of 
homeopathic remedies, including Conium , 
Lachesis , and Phytolacca , and advised 
about dietary changes, but nothing  
brought more than temporary relief.  
When she was given Calc. carb. , however, 
the mastitis symptoms disappeared 
completely. After that she had the 
occasional dose of Calc. carb. , but 
remained largely free of pain and 
discomfort. During menopause, Catherine 
developed the ﬁrst symptoms of mastitis 
that she had experienced in ﬁve years.  
She again responded well to Calc. carb. , 
needing just two or three doses during 
menopause. She has remained symptom-
free ever since.CAUTION
• If there are changes to the nipple shape 
or color, or to the skin texture or hang of the 
breast, or if there is a hard or tender area or 
persistent pain, see a doctor as soon as 
possible.
• If there is discharge from the breast that is 
not associated with lactation, consult a doctor.

202 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
Symptoms
• Enlarged prostate: difficulty in starting a 
stream of urine, weak urine flow, and the need 
to urinate during the night. In later stages, 
possible incontinence due to overflow from 
the bladder and frequency of urination. In 
severe cases, possible obstruction of urine flow 
associated with distension of the abdomen.
• Prostatitis: pain when passing urine, increased 
frequency of urination, possible fever, discharge 
from the penis associated with pain in the colon 
and lower abdomen, and blood in the urine.
• Cancer: symptoms resemble those of an 
enlarged prostate, but there may be none at 
all. Possible pain from secondary cancers.  
If cancer has spread locally , possible urinary 
obstruction or pelvic pain.
Causes
The precise cause of prostate enlargement with 
age is unknown, although it may be due to an 
excess of a testosterone-type hormone or to a 
nutritional deficiency . Prostatitis is caused by a 
urinary infection, possibly following the use of  
a catheter or excessive sexual activity . The  
causes of cancer are unknown  (see page 208) .
Conventional care
Prostate enlargement and prostatitis are 
diagnosed by examination, ultrasound scanning, 
urine analysis, and blood tests to check kidney 
function. Strength of urine flow may be 
measured. Cancer is detected by examination, 
scanning, or biopsy . Treatment for an enlarged 
prostate includes alpha blockers, which relax 
smooth muscle, thus increasing urinary flow , 
and testosterone-inhibiting drugs, or surgical 
removal. Prostatitis is treated with antibiotics, 
and cancer by the conventional methods  (see 
page 208) .
Homeopathic medicine
Treatment is constitutional for all prostate 
problems, especially if they result from a 
hormonal imbalance. The choice of remedy 
will depend upon an individual’s symptoms  
(see page 18) . Apis is indicated for an enlarged 
prostate with urine retention. Baryta carb.  is prescribed for enlargement and hardening of 
the prostate. Conium  is often effective for an 
enlarged prostate accompanied by a discharge 
of prostatic fluid; and Thuja  is used to treat 
chronic enlargement of the prostate and 
inflammation associated with infection.  
Other constitutional remedies commonly 
used to treat prostate problems include  
Calc. carb. , Lycopodium , Nux vomica ,  
Pulsatilla , and Sulphur .
Remedies for the specific symptoms of an 
enlarged prostate include Sabal , if urination  
is difficult or if there are spasms of the 
bladder or urethra; Baryta carb. , when there  
is a frequent urge to urinate, a slow stream  
of urine, and impotence; Iodum , when there 
are shrunken testicles, impotence, and the 
prostate feels hard; and Argentum nit. , for 
prostate problems associated with erectile 
dysfunction. For symptoms of prostatitis, 
Sabal  is given if the prostate is enlarged  
and the area around the gland feels cold; 
Chimaphila , if prostatic fluid is leaking  
from the penis and there is urine retention; 
Selenium , when urine dribbles from the penis 
and there is impotence; and Capsicum  for 
burning pains in the prostate.
Lifestyle
An enlarged prostate may benefit from  
1 tbsp of lecithin as instructed, a zinc 
supplement, and evening primrose  
oil. The diet should include plenty of oily 
fish, but no caffeine, alcohol, or refined 
sugar. Constipation is to be avoided. Sabal   
is available in an herbal form called palmetto 
which is good for prostatitis, as is 2–3 tsp 
cold, pressed flaxseed oil taken twice a day .Disorders of the prostate gland rarely occur in men under 30. Enlargement of the 
prostate, and the consequent pressure on the bladder and urethra, commonly occur 
among men over 45. Prostatitis, or inflammation of the prostate, usually affects 
those in their thirties and forties, while prostate cancer generally affects men over 60.PROSTATE PROBLEMSCASE HISTORY
George was 74 and had a seven-year history 
of an enlarged prostate. It caused him to 
urinate every couple of hours, and he had to 
get up at least three times a night. Following 
a biopsy, he had been assured that there 
was no cancer. He had been generally 
healthy all his life, apart from having a 
tubercular lymph node removed when he 
was in his twenties.
PERSONAL DETAILS
This rather shy, apprehensive man was 
something of a perfectionist. Extremely 
ambitious, George had progressed to 
become president of one company he 
worked for and, when seen, had his own 
consultancy business—for relaxation, 
he claimed. He found the prospect of 
addressing large groups of people daunting, 
but performed well once he had begun.
FOOD PREFERENCES
George disliked extremes of heat and 
cold. Apart from his prostate problem, he 
was in extremely good health for his age. 
He experienced a lot of ﬂatulence, and 
eating even small amounts of food made 
him feel full.
GENERAL DETAILS
George had a very sweet tooth and enjoyed 
alcohol. He liked his foods warm, and  
hated cold foods or drinks. Oysters, onions, 
and brassicas such as cabbage upset  
his digestion.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
George was prescribed Phosphorus  as  
a constitutional remedy and an herbal form  
of Sabal  for his symptoms. This treatment 
reduced his urination at night slightly for a 
couple of months, after which the frequency 
increased to what it had been before. He 
was then prescribed Lycopodium , and his 
condition began to improve generally. He was 
getting up only once a night—considered to 
be normal at his age—and his sexual 
function also improved. George experienced 
a setback following minor surgery, but again 
responded well to Lycopodium . He continues 
to get up just once a night, and does not 
suffer from frequency of urination at all 
during the day. He takes the occasional dose 
of Sabal  if he feels his condition might start 
to deteriorate.CAUTION
• If there is a dragging feeling between  
the legs, difﬁculty in passing urine, and 
blood in the urine, or if there is acute urine 
retention (a few drops may be passed) 
causing abdominal discomfort, see a doctor 
as soon as possible.

•203
Symptoms
• Inability to conceive a child despite having 
regular sexual intercourse without the  
use of contraceptives.
Causes
Male infertility is usually due to a low sperm 
count, which may be the result of physiological 
problems, taking drugs, or environmental 
factors; malformed sperm; or the inability of 
sperm to reach the egg. It may also be caused 
by problems in the testicles or vas deferens, 
often the result of sexually transmitted disease; 
or malformation of the testes due to an 
endocrine (glandular) disorder. Erectile 
dysfunction or ejaculatory problems may also 
result in infertility , and this situation may be 
aggravated by stress, overwork, tiredness, or 
psychological problems.
The most common cause of female 
infertility is failure to produce eggs. This may 
be the result of a hormonal disorder, stress, 
problems with the ovaries such as cysts, 
damaged fallopian tubes caused by pelvic 
inflammatory disease, or uterine abnormalities 
such as fibroids. The cervical mucus may be 
too stringy for sperm to get through, or it 
may contain antibodies that kill sperm. Rarely , 
defective chromosomes are responsible.
Conventional care
The full medical history of each partner is 
studied, physical examinations made, and any 
sexual problems discussed. Semen analysis and 
a biopsy of the testes can identify a low sperm 
count. A post-coital semen test can reveal 
whether the cervical mucus is deterring the 
sperm. A temperature chart kept by the woman 
may help to reveal if and when ovulation 
occurs. Hormone levels will be checked and 
an ultrasound scan performed. A laparoscopy 
can explore the fallopian tubes and ovaries.
Artificial insemination can solve the problem 
of defective sperm. Hormone treatment can be 
given to either sex, and surgery may repair 
certain damage to the female reproductive 
organs; in vitro fertilization is also an option.Homeopathic medicine
Provided there are no physiological problems, 
constitutional treatment will try to rectify 
imbalances in the body systems controlling 
reproduction. Remedies are determined largely 
by an individual’s symptoms  (see page 18) . In 
men, Aurum met.  is indicated for childhood 
atrophy of the testes or painful, swollen testicles; 
and Causticum  for infertility associated with 
testicular pain or blood in the spermatic fluid. 
In women, Nat. carb.  is prescribed for the non-
retention of semen; and Sepia when infertility 
results from a hormonal imbalance and an 
aversion to sexual intercourse. Although not 
strictly an infertility problem, Sabina  is effective 
for recurrent miscarriage in early pregnancy .
Specific local remedies for men include 
Agnus castus , for erectile dysfunction and a lack 
of energy; Conium , for erectile dysfunction, 
with cramps and cold legs; and Lycopodium , 
when there is increased sexual desire, but 
intercourse is spoiled by the anticipation of  
the failure to conceive. Conium  is prescribed  
for women when infertility is associated with 
breast tenderness and suppressed sexual desire; 
and Lycopodium  when there is lower abdominal 
tenderness and vaginal dryness.
Lifestyle
It is advisable to reduce intake of alcohol and 
caffeine, and desirable to eat organic foods 
and those that are high in zinc, such as whole 
grains and nuts. Drugs such as anabolic 
steroids and tobacco should be avoided. 
Overexertion is inadvisable, while relaxation 
techniques, meditation, and stress-reduction 
methods are all beneficial. Men should not 
wear tight-fitting pants and, if they have a low 
sperm count, should abstain from sexual 
intercourse in the week before the woman 
ovulates. There is some evidence to suggest 
that adopting the missionary position during 
intercourse, with the woman remaining still 
for 20 minutes afterward, will increase the 
chances of conception. Women are advised 
not to use vaginal douches, and to substitute 
egg white for KY jelly as a lubricant.REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEMS
Infertility is said to exist if a couple has been having regular sexual intercourse 
without the use of contraceptives for more than a year and the woman has not 
become pregnant. About one in seven couples in the developed world have 
infertility problems; 30 percent because of the male, 30 percent because of  
the female, and 40 percent due to both.INFERTILITYCASE HISTORY
Bob and Alice had two children, the ﬁrst by  
a difﬁcult forceps delivery and the second 
delivered normally after some homeopathic 
treatment. Alice, 35, had then had two 
miscarriages, since when she had been 
unable to conceive. Her periods were 
irregular, and tests showed that she was  
not ovulating. Bob, 42, had been diagnosed 
as having a low sperm count and poor 
mobility of sperm.
PERSONAL DETAILS
The couple had been happily married for  
15 years. Alice had been upset by her 
doctor and hospital staff during the birth  
of her ﬁrst child, and she also had problems 
with her stepmother (her father had 
remarried after his wife died when Alice was 
six). Bob was a taciturn, overweight man, 
who possibly only attended the consultation 
at his wife’s request.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Both had a sweet tooth and ate a lot of 
reﬁned carbohydrates. Bob drank a lot of 
coffee. He had a large appetite and felt 
better for eating. He liked eggs but not fats.
GENERAL DETAILS
Bob felt the cold easily, but sweated at 
night. Alice also felt the cold. She was 
worse for emotional stress and in the 
evening, but revived after midnight. She felt 
better for hot baths, eating, and massage.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Bob and Alice were put on a diet low in 
reﬁned carbohydrates and caffeine, and 
given vitamin and mineral supplements. 
Bob was prescribed Calc. carb. , and Alice 
Staphysagria.  Alice was advised to write, 
but not send, letters to the medical staff 
and her stepmother expressing her 
feelings. On her return a month later, she 
reported that Bob had lost 14 lb (6 kg)  
in weight and felt healthier. Alice felt 
emotionally relieved but somewhat 
detached from reality. She stayed on the 
diet and was given Anacardium.  One 
month later Alice became pregnant and 
was given Pulsatilla  for morning sickness. 
She was treated homeopathically to 
stabilize the pregnancy and relieve 
symptoms during the next few months 
before giving birth to a boy.

204 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
IMMUNE SYSTEM
The immune system is the collective name given to various 
mechanisms that enable the body to defend itself against  
invasion by infection-carrying agents such as bacteria, viruses,  
fungi, and foreign proteins. The skin, certain glands, and the  
lymphatic system are all part of the immune system.
How the system works
IMMUNE SYSTEM  The immune system  
is a complex network of glands, vessels,  
tissues, and organs that attempt to  
eliminate harmful organisms that might 
cause infection or disease in the body. 
Lymph vessels cover the whole body and 
are studded with lymph glands, masses  
of lymph tissue in which invading  
organisms are attacked. Lymph from all 
over the body is filtered by flowing  
through lymph glands before  
draining back into the bloodstream.Adenoids are 
glandular 
swellings that 
protect against 
respiratory 
infections
Tonsils are lymphoid 
tissues that guard 
against inhaled or 
ingested organismsLymph drains from 
body into right and 
left subclavian vein
White blood cells 
migrate from bone 
marrow to thymus 
gland, where they 
develop into T-cellsEnzymes secreted in 
stomach destroy 
ingested organisms
Peyer’s patches are 
clusters of lymph 
tissue in lower 
small intestine
White blood cells 
are generated in 
bone marrow
Lymph capillaries are 
smallest vessels in 
lymphatic system
Lymph gland is 
enclosed mass of 
lymph tissue that 
acts as filterLymph vessels lie 
just beneath skin 
and roughly follow 
venous system
Skin is first 
defensive barrier 
against invading 
organismsAny invading organism trying to enter the 
body must break down the defensive barriers 
erected by the immune system. It will 
probably pass through an area of broken skin 
or enter the respiratory and digestive tract via 
the mouth or nose. There are glands along 
these routes that produce protective enzymes 
or natural antibiotic secretions, but if an 
organism does break through into body 
tissue, the immune system relies heavily on 
the lymphatic system.
The lymphatic system
This body system consists of lymph vessels 
that carry lymph from the tissue spaces 
between cells all over the body to lymph 
glands, or nodes. Lymph is a clear fluid  
that derives from plasma in blood from 
which proteins and other nutrients have 
been removed. Lymph drains from the 
bloodstream into capillaries and then into 
the lymph vessels. The flow of lymph is 
controlled by muscle contractions and 
valves. Invading organisms are trapped  
in lymph glands dotted throughout the 
lymphatic system. Here they are attacked  
by scavenging white blood cells called 
macrophages. Lymph glands also produce 
lymphocytes, another form of white blood 
cell. Some lymphocytes (B-cells) produce 
antibodies that attack antigens on the surface 
of an invading organism  (see page 206) ; other 
lymphocytes (T-cells) destroy invading 
organisms directly .
Lymphocytes have the ability to remember 
invaders that they have come across before, 
and so respond quickly if the body is invaded 
again. On the other hand, the immune system 
can fail to spot invaders, or it can overreact—
by developing allergies—or react abnormally 
to the body’s own tissues, as in autoimmune 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis  (see page 
197). Alternatively , it may fail to recognize 
that its own cells have begun to function 
abnormally , hence the development of cancer.

•205
Symptoms
• Identifiable fatigue that is present for  
50 percent of the time and for at least six 
months, severely affecting physical and 
mental functioning.
• Muscular pain, weight fluctuation, and 
sleep disturbance.
• Possible abnormal temperature regulation, 
recurrent sore throat, swelling of the lymph 
glands, and depression.
Causes
CFS often follows a viral infection of the  
upper respiratory or digestive tract. It is not 
known why some people do not recover fully . 
It may be due to malfunctions of the immune 
or metabolic system, stress, overwork,  
overuse of antibiotics, dysfunctional 
production of the hormone melatonin,  
the effects on neurotransmitters in the brain  
of chemicals leaking out of the digestive tract, 
pollution or toxicity , or even geopathic stress 
(disruptions in radiation emitted by the Earth).
Conventional care
There is no single diagnostic test for CFS,  
and the nature of the condition makes it very 
difficult to conduct conventional research. A 
detailed medical history is required, together 
with a physical examination that concentrates 
on the body’s neurological system. There  
is no conventional treatment as such. Anti-
depressant drugs may be prescribed for sleep 
disturbances, but lifestyle guidelines form the 
basis of conventional care.
Homeopathic medicine
As a result of the large range of possible  
physical and mental symptoms, CFS is  
treated constitutionally . Psychological and 
environmental factors are studied in particular, 
together with the person’s dietary history . The 
choice of remedy is determined largely by an 
individual’s symptoms  (see page 18) . Phosphoric ac. is prescribed for weakness in the spinal cord 
and associated nerves; Nat. mur .  is effective for 
fatigue—affecting the knees, ankles, and dorsal 
spine in particular—caused by mental exertion. 
Calc. carb.  is used to treat fatigue, particularly of 
the thigh muscles, caused by walking; and 
Arsen. alb.  is given for fatigue, especially of the 
chest muscles, caused by walking.
Remedies for localized, specific symptoms 
include Belladonna , when there are swollen 
glands in the neck and groin, muscular and 
joint pains, aches and burning pains all over the 
body , and a constant sore throat; and Causticum , 
when there is permanent chilliness, stiffness and 
pain in the joints and muscles, and weakness 
after the slightest exertion. Kali carb.  may be 
given for swollen glands in the neck and groin, 
joint pains, numbness in the throat, panic 
attacks, and permanent chilliness; Carbo veg.   
for aches and burning pains all over the body , 
confusion, bloating and great flatulence, and 
faintness in the morning; and China  for bloating, 
anxiety , sleeplessness, and a feeling of weakness 
after the slightest exertion.
Lifestyle 
The key to recovery from CFS is rest. In 
planning a strategy for recuperation, it is helpful 
to imagine the energy of the body as if it were 
being supplied from checking and savings bank 
accounts. CFS occurs if the savings account has 
been seriously depleted over a lengthy period. 
In order to recover, the savings account needs 
reimbursing from the checking account. In 
practical terms, this means that any activity 
should leave in reserve 25 percent of the energy 
normally used when 100 percent is what can be 
achieved without tiring. So, if someone can 
walk 100 yards (meters) without getting tired, 
they should only walk 75 yards (meters). A diet 
low in refined carbohydrates, with vitamin and 
mineral supplements, is beneficial. Recreational 
drug-taking and smoking are inadvisable, and 
alcohol intake should be reduced.IMMUNE SYSTEM
Also known as myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) and postviral syndrome, CFS was 
first recognized as a condition in conventional medical circles in the 1990s. Its 
symptoms mimic many other illnesses. It has been described as a physical illness 
brought on by stress. Three times more women than men are affected in the 
developed world.CHRONIC FATIGUE 
SYNDROME (CFS)CASE HISTORY
Tommy was 43, with a 20-year history of 
depression and CFS, which had started 
following an attack of pneumonia. Tommy 
was constantly tired; he would wake at  
4 a.m. or 5 a.m. in an anxious state. His 
body felt cold, and he had stiff, painful 
muscles, indigestion, ﬂatulence, and a 
feeling of imminent collapse.
PERSONAL DETAILS
An only child, Tommy lost his father when 
he was nine. He was extremely ambitious 
and had risen to a high rank in the civil 
service. His job involved public speaking, 
which he found increasingly daunting. He 
worried about his responsibilities, but was 
better for working. He awoke unrefreshed 
from sleep.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Tommy had a strong craving for sweet and 
warm foods. He particularly hated cold 
meats, but also disliked bread, onions, and 
fermentable foods such as cabbage, which 
increased his ﬂatulence. He was often 
ravenously hungry but would feel full after 
eating only a few mouthfuls of food.
GENERAL DETAILS
Tommy felt worse between 4 p.m. and  
8 p.m., and in wet and stormy weather.  
Tight clothes made him uncomfortable.  
He felt better after midnight and for walks.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Tommy was advised to pace himself (see 
Lifestyle, left), and prescribed Lycopodium.  
One month later, he was less depressed 
but still sleeping badly. He incorporated 
more vegetables and ﬁsh into his diet,  
with less meat and coffee, fewer dairy 
products, and no reﬁned carbohydrates. 
Over the next few months, with mineral  
and vitamin supplements and different 
potencies of Lycopodium , some of 
Tommy’s physical symptoms abated, 
although he still felt tired and his sleep 
was disturbed. He was better able to cope 
mentally with stress. Gradually, his energy 
levels rose, especially after he was 
prescribed antidepressants by his doctor 
to help him sleep. After taking more 
Lycopodium , he was able to give up the 
antidepressants, and felt ﬁt, positive, and 
able to cope with life.

206 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
be combined with vitamin supplements, 
reflexology , hypnotherapy , and desensitization, 
the last of which involves the gradual 
introduction of the source of irritation in order 
to increase a person’s level of tolerance until 
they no longer have an allergic reaction.
Homeopathic medicine
Where there is only one allergy (a fixed  
allergy), homeopathic treatment is similar to 
conventional treatment. Constitutional 
treatment is used to correct imbalances in the 
body , and to discourage the immune system 
from overreacting. Such treatment is even more 
beneficial when there is not a fixed allergy but  
a cyclic allergy situation. This is when, even 
though the sources of irritation are removed 
from the diet, the body develops oversensitivity 
to something else. In this case, it is necessary to 
investigate the malfunctioning of the immune 
system, which may be due to an inherited 
weakness or body imbalances.
The choice of constitutional remedy will 
largely be determined by an individual’s 
symptoms  (see page 18) . Apis is indicated for 
allergic swelling of the face, eyelids, lips, or Symptoms
• Rash or itchy swelling on the skin.
• Hay fever: irritation of mucous membranes 
in the sinuses, causing sneezing and the 
production of watery catarrh.
• Asthma: possible spasms and narrowing  
of the airways.
• Inflamed and possibly watering eyes.
• Possible nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
• In severe cases of type I allergy  (see right) , 
possible anaphylactic shock—a severe, nervous 
reaction that includes breathing difficulties,  
a drop in blood pressure, abdominal pain, 
swelling of the tongue or throat, and diarrhea.
Causes
Conventionally , allergies are described in terms 
of four categories of hypersensitivity reaction. 
T ype I is the most common of the four, and  
is known as anaphylactic or immediate 
hypersensitivity . It includes allergies to pollens, 
animal dander, house dust, dust mites, some 
drugs, yeast, insect venom, and certain foods, 
especially milk, eggs, shellfish, nuts, and some 
dried fruits. These allergens stimulate the body 
to produce a specific kind of antibody called 
immunoglobulin E (IgE), which coats cells in 
the skin, sinuses, lungs, and stomach. When a 
further exposure to the allergen occurs, the 
immunoglobulin antibodies become attached  
to cells in body tissues called mast cells. In 
response, these cells release chemicals, mainly 
histamine, which cause allergic reactions. 
Asthma, hay fever, urticaria, anaphylactic  
shock, some forms of eczema, and food allergy 
are type I allergies.
T ypes II, III, and IV are all much less 
common than type I. In the case of type II, 
antibodies bind themselves to antigens on  
cell surfaces, resulting in the damage to and 
destruction of cells, as in certain autoimmune 
disorders. With type III allergies, antibodies 
combine with antigens to form particles called immune complexes. These travel 
around the body in the bloodstream 
and can lodge anywhere, stimulating 
the immune system further. This 
mechanism is responsible for reactions to 
immunization and allergic alveolitis 
(inflammation of the alveolar walls in the 
lungs). T ype IV is known as delayed 
hypersensitivity . T -cells (white blood cells) 
combine with antigens and release  
chemicals called lymphokines, which cause 
inflammation. These chemicals are responsible 
for measles rashes and contact dermatitis.
Another possible cause of allergy 
considered in complementary medical circles 
is leaky gut syndrome, whereby cells in the 
lining of the bowel are not as adherent as they 
should be. Parts of proteins may pass into the 
bloodstream, triggering antibody production. 
Leakage may occur from birth, or be caused 
by infection or by taking certain drugs.
Conventional care
Allergies are investigated by means of skin-
testing. A small amount of the suspected 
allergen is pin-pricked under the skin, or placed 
beneath a patch resembling an adhesive bandage, 
and the reaction is monitored. Blood tests can 
measure the reactions of antibodies and 
allergens that have been highlighted by dyes. 
Elimination and challenge, whereby a suspected 
irritant is removed from the diet or the 
surroundings for a while and then reintroduced, 
is another method of allergy identification.
Once an allergen has been identified, the 
effects of the antibody–antigen reaction can be 
relieved, using mainly antihistamine drugs. 
These block the effects of histamine, thus 
preventing allergic symptoms from developing. 
Other drugs include sodium chromoglycate, 
used mainly to treat asthma, and corticosteroids. 
Allergic skin reactions can be treated with 
ointments containing corticosteroids. Drugs may ALLERGIES
ANTIBODIES AT WORK  When under threat from 
harmful substances—or antigens—the body  
produces antibodies that attach themselves to 
special immune cells (mast cells) and can destroy 
invading particles. An allergic reaction occurs 
when large numbers of antibodies are activated in 
response to harmless, misidentified substances 
called allergens. This triggers the release of  
histamine, causing unpleasant side-effects.Mast 
cellAn allergy is defined as a condition that is caused by an inappropriate  
or exaggerated reaction by the body’s immune system. Harmless 
substances are misidentified by it as potentially dangerous, so the 
immune response is to form antibodies. These attack the perceived 
irritants—or allergens—on the surface of the offending substance. 
The reaction between antibodies and allergens stimulates the 
release of substances within the body, such as histamine, which 
cause a variety of irritating symptoms.
Histamine released in 
response to allergenAntibody 
molecule
Allergen encounters 
antibodyAllergen

•207 IMMUNE SYSTEM
CASE HISTORIES
Vera, a 59-year-old woman, had developed 
allergic rhinitis on a camping trip at age 30. 
She had what appeared to be cold symptoms 
that lasted for three months. She then 
developed prolonged sneezing attacks,  
during which she felt dreadful. She was 
allergy-tested and found to be allergic to mold. 
Desensitization relieved the condition until  
a recurrence during remodeling work on Vera’s 
house. She was diagnosed as allergic to 
grass. All conventional medication upset her, 
and her condition deteriorated. Symptoms 
were profuse, watery catarrh, with sneezing 
and a frontal headache. When ﬁrst seen, 
Vera’s attacks occurred every four days.
PERSONAL DETAILS
A placid, happy person, Vera had a tendency 
to be overcritical. During attacks, however, 
she was tearful, had difﬁculty speaking, and 
hated being fussed over. She sighed a lot. 
She was oversensitive and ﬁnicky.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Vera tended to be thirsty rather than hungry, 
and she liked acidic foods, the fat from meat, 
and brandy. She liked to drink water little and 
often, but ice-cold water made her sick.
GENERAL DETAILS
Vera felt the cold very easily, but if she had 
a headache she liked to put her head out of 
a window. She loved hot, dry weather and 
being in bed, and loathed damp weather 
and fall.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Vera was put on a detoxiﬁcation program, 
which had little effect on her condition. She 
felt that humidity exacerbated her problems. 
Nat. sulph.  was prescribed twice a day in 
damp weather, and Arsen. alb.  in different 
potencies for the allergic symptoms. At ﬁrst 
Vera lost weight, the rhinitis attacks became 
less frequent, and a long-standing burning 
sensation in her feet disappeared. Over the 
next few months, the attacks diminished 
even further and, a year after her initial 
consultation, the occasional attack was much 
less severe. A year later, she did have a bad 
attack, but recovered well until a bout of 
inﬂuenza another 12 months later. After she 
recovered from this, the rhinitis cleared up 
completely, and she was able to stop all 
medication, including homeopathic remedies.CAUTIONJodie was a 40-year-old schoolteacher who 
had experienced migraines since childhood. 
They had improved once she identiﬁed 
chocolate, red wine, and citrus fruits as 
triggers. She also had allergic rhinitis, with 
heavy and painful sinuses, a dry nose,  
one-sided headaches, a stiff neck, watery 
catarrh, and an itchy palate. The rhinitis  
was triggered by fumes, ﬂowers, dust mites, 
cold wind, and hot air.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Jodie had left a poor farming community  
to go to college. She was unattached,  
but this suited her, since her career was 
important to her. She disliked being 
overweight, and felt she could achieve 
more. She was open and sensitive,  
and liked to be fussed over and reassured. 
If overworked, she became apathetic  
and indifferent.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Jodie liked to drink very cold water and milk. 
She liked ice cream, ﬁsh, and salty, spicy, 
and acidic foods, but she disliked fruits, and 
warm foods and drinks, especially coffee.
FEARS
Jodie described many fears, including old 
age, snakes, heights, and thunderstorms.
GENERAL DETAILS
Jodie felt worse in hot weather, and 
experienced headaches before 
thunderstorms. She felt better for eating, 
sleep, and massage. She thought she 
should have more energy.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Jodie was prescribed Belladonna , and had 
no migraines for a month, although the 
rhinitis was worse. She was put on a diet  
to balance blood-sugar levels, and given 
chromium and zinc supplements, and 
antioxidants. After feeling unwell initially,  
her energy levels rose, although she still 
had sinus-related headaches and an 
occasional migraine. She was given three 
doses of Phosphorus.  A month later her 
sinuses had improved, she was migraine-
free, and her energy levels were normal.  
A ﬁtness regimen improved her health  
further. Now Jodie has only an occasional 
migraine if she is overworked.• If a person goes into anaphylactic  
shock—that is, they collapse with pale, 
cold, and clammy skin, anxiety, nausea, 
thirst, faintness, or difﬁculty breathing—
call 911 .
• If someone who is known to suffer from 
asthma develops pale, cold, and clammy 
skin, anxiety, and labored breathing, or  
their breathing rate exceeds 40 breaths  
per minute, call 911 .
• If an asthma sufferer does not respond to 
any treatment within 12 hours, see a doctor. 
If their condition appears to be deteriorating 
rapidly, consult a doctor immediately.mouth. Arsen. alb.  is prescribed for allergic 
reactions associated with the nose such as 
allergic rhinitis and hay fever. Calc. carb.  is 
used to treat allergic reactions of the skin and 
mucous membranes; while Carcinosin  is 
indicated when there are multiple allergies. 
Other constitutional remedies often used 
include Nat. carb. , Nat. mur . , Nux vomica , 
Pulsatilla , Sulphur , and Tuberculinum.
Acute symptoms can be treated with a 
number of other remedies, such as Allium 
cepa, for hay fever with profuse watering  
of the eyes and catarrh that irritates and 
inflames the nostrils and upper lip; and 
Arundo , when there is great itchiness around 
the nostrils and palate, with sneezing, pain  
in the bridge of the nose, and copious saliva. 
Wyethia  is prescribed for great itchiness in the 
nose and palate, which the person constantly 
rubs with the tongue; and Arum triph.  is 
effective for cracked lips and hoarseness.
Lifestyle
Allergies, like many conditions, tend to 
become worse if a person is run-down, 
stressed, overtired, has a poor diet, or does 
not get adequate exercise. If a food allergy  
is suspected, the potential irritant should be 
eliminated from the diet for four days, then 
reintroduced within 12 days and any changes 
of symptoms noted. This is a method worth 
trying for a number of foods, one at a time, 
until the culprit is isolated. If household 
products are believed to be the cause of an 
allergic reaction, the affected person should 
walk in the open air for an hour, then return 
home and sniff any strong-smelling products. 
If a substance provokes excessive sneezing, it 
is probably the cause of the allergic reaction, 
and should be removed from the home.

208 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
CAUTION
Although many of these symptoms may not 
necessarily be indicative of cancer, it is wise 
to consult a doctor about any of the following.
• Persistent lump or thickening anywhere on 
the skin or in a testicle or breast.
• Unexplained swelling of a limb.
• Enlargement, bleeding, irritation or other 
change in the appearance of a mole.
• Severe recurrent headaches.
• Difﬁculty in swallowing.
• Hoarseness that lasts for more than a month.• Difﬁculty in passing urine.
• Unexplained weight loss of more than about 
1 lb (0.5 kg) a week.
• Unusual bleeding from the mouth, nipples, 
anus, or genitals, or the coughing up of blood.
• Bleeding from the vagina between menstrual 
periods and altered bleeding during them.
• Persistent indigestion.
• Abdominal pain or change in bowel habits 
unrelated to dietary changes.
• Sores that do not heal.Symptoms
• Lumps or changes in the color or other 
features of the skin.
• Symptoms of obstruction in the digestive 
tract, or hoarseness.
• Bleeding from orifices such as the mouth  
or anus.
• Severe, recurrent, or constant headaches.
• Ulcers or sores that do not heal.
• Changes in bowel habits.
• Changes in the breasts.
• Painful, numb, or tingling nerves.
• Rapid, unexplained weight loss.
Causes
The exact causes of cancer are unknown. 
Most experts agree that probably at least two 
factors, such as genetic tendency and diet,  
or pollution and infection, combine to create 
a disturbance within a cell. Chromosomes 
may be damaged before birth, as a result of 
inherited or acquired defects of the immune 
system, or by radiation, viruses, tobacco 
smoke, carcinogenic substances such as 
asbestos, a lack of antioxidants such as 
vitamins A, C, E, and selenium, other dietary 
deficiencies, or aging. Complementary 
medical practitioners believe that other  
factors are significant too, such as food 
intolerance, carcinogens in food—for example, 
preservatives, other additives, and pesticide 
traces—and psychological factors, particularly suppressed emotional shock or great stress.  
It has also been postulated that some people 
are more than usually sensitive to geopathic 
stress (natural radiation emitted by the Earth), 
or emissions from buildings or power cables.  
Conventional care
Cancer can be detected by cytology tests such 
as pap smears, X-rays, imaging techniques 
such as mammograms, and chemical markers 
in the blood—for example, prostate-specific 
antigen, which can identify otherwise 
undetectable prostate cancer. Often, however, Cancer is a by-product of the growth and repair processes 
within the human body whereby 500 billion new cells are 
formed each day . Inevitably , some of these cells are defective, 
and their growth may become out of control. Defective  
cells are usually destroyed by the body’s immune system,  but if this does not occur, a rapidly dividing colony of 
defective cells becomes a tumor. This tumor may grow  
and spread into adjacent body tissue. Cancer may affect 
major organs, bones, glands, skin, or muscles. The 
symptoms vary from site to site.CANCER
diagnosis of cancer follows the appearance  
of symptoms, and is confirmed by a biopsy .
In most cases, treatment involves radiotherapy , 
chemotherapy , or surgery , or a combination of 
these. Radiotherapy uses radiation to reduce and 
destroy tumors and cancer cells that have spread 
beyond the original tumor or traveled to other 
parts of the body (metastasis). Chemotherapy 
has the same aim, but uses anticancer drugs. 
Surgery removes the primary tumor. The 
principal aim of conventional methods is to 
suppress the rate of growth of the cancer. They 
are more effective with cancers in certain parts of 
the body than in others.
Homeopathic medicine
Most homeopathic practitioners would agree 
that a combination of homeopathic and 
conventional techniques, along with dietary and 
other lifestyle changes, is the best program  
of treatment. The ability of a cancerous growth 
to destroy the surrounding healthy tissue has  
to be dealt with quickly , and conventional 
medicine can do this. Homeopathy , on the  
other hand, attempts to address the underlying 
causes. As with other chronic ailments, this 
takes the form of constitutional assessment. Of 
particular interest is the psychological makeup ABNORMAL CELL DIVISION  
Cancer develops as a result of 
abnormal cell division. All cells 
multiply by dividing into two. This 
is usually controlled so that just 
the right amount of cell division 
occurs to replace dead or 
damaged cells. This process 
sometimes proceeds at an 
abnormally fast rate, however, 
creating a tumour. As it grows, 
cells force their way into 
neighboring tissues or organs. 
Rogue cells from a tumour in the 
skin, for example, can then 
travel via the lymphatic system 
to other parts of the body, where 
secondaries may form.Cancer cell Lymph vesselEpidermis
Flow of 
lymphCluster of cancer 
cells causes skin 
swelling

•209
of a person, especially signs of severe emotional 
stress that might have impaired immunity . 
Constitutional remedies will be largely 
determined by an individual’s symptoms   
(see page 18) , but Arsen. alb.  is often indicated 
for cancers with burning pain and in any 
location. Bromium , on the other hand,  
is effective for breast cancer in particular.  
Carbo an.  is used to treat cancers of the breast, 
stomach, uterus, and glands in the later stages, 
while Nitric ac.  is associated with cancer of the 
breast, uterus, vagina, and rectum. Other 
constitutional remedies often used to treat 
cancer are Conium , Lycopodium , Phosphorus ,  
and Silica.  Those associated with cancer in 
particular organs include Phosphorus , Calcium , 
Fluoric ac. , Conium , and Hekla  for bones; 
Crotalus  and Kali. mur .  for connective tissue; and 
Carbo an. , Conium , and Aurum mur .  for glands.
Other treatments
It is generally acknowledged that dietary 
excess or deficiency may predispose an 
individual to the formation of cancer. 
Controversy surrounds the use of dietary 
treatment for the disease, but it can play  
a supportive role. Most therapies have their 
origins in the Gerson treatment based on  
an initially vegan, then lacto-vegetarian diet, 
along with fruit and vegetable juices and 
coffee enemas to detoxify the liver.
Many nutritional therapies include high doses 
of antioxidants to counteract cellular damage 
inflicted by free radicals in the bloodstream. 
These are absorbed from the environment as 
well as foods. Other complementary therapies 
use combinations of herbs or substances such  
as extractions of mistletoe and shark cartilage, 
but many await further trials.
Lifestyle
The diet should include plenty of unrefined 
carbohydrates and fresh fruits and vegetables, 
but few animal fats or animal proteins. 
Nutritional supplements prescribed by a 
doctor may safely be accompanied by over-
the-counter antioxidants, and are advisable 
during radiotherapy or chemotherapy . 
Adequate physical exercise is desirable, 
although symptoms may restrict choice.
Emotional or other psychological problems 
need to be tackled. Meditation, prayer, and 
relaxation may help to establish a positive 
outlook and strengthen the will to live. 
Visualization techniques can be used to 
encourage the destruction of the cancer  
by treatment, and to focus on a fully 
functioning immune system.IMMUNE SYSTEM
CASE HISTORIES
Clarissa, 69, had had her left breast removed 
eight years previously, followed by the right 
breast and associated lymph glands two years 
after that. One year before her consultation, 
an X-ray had revealed secondary cancers in 
the ribs, lungs, and scar tissue. Chemotherapy 
eliminated the skin cancer, but Clarissa did 
not respond well to the treatment. She 
recovered, but developed back pain due to 
secondaries in the spine. Chemotherapy was 
again unsuitable for Clarissa, who was then 
given steroids and sent home to die.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Of Jewish origin, Clarissa had ﬂed Nazi 
Germany in 1933. She was tense, with  
a quick temper. She felt a great need for 
fresh air and lacked strength. She believed 
her role was to keep her family happy, but 
had become estranged from her daughter 
and son-in-law over religion. Each breast 
operation followed a driving test, which  
she failed as a result of anxiety.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Clarissa had put herself on a vegan diet for 
the cancer and because she hated meat. 
Her appetite was not good. She craved ice 
cream and disliked warm foods. She liked 
salad vegetables, whole-wheat bread, and 
oats, but disliked legumes.
GENERAL DETAILS
Clarissa felt the cold but loved the open air. 
She preferred wet, humid weather. She  
was sensitive to light and noise, disliked 
mental exertion, and felt unwell if she 
became nervous.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
It was decided to detoxify Clarissa with  
a variation of the Gerson diet. Her drugs were 
gradually reduced to low dosages, and she 
was then given Silica.  Within three months 
she was stronger and off the steroids. The 
levels of red and white cells in her blood were 
improving, although she still had back pain, 
for which Chelidonium  was prescribed. She 
could soon climb stairs easily as her energy 
levels rose. She was then given injections  
of bamboo to strengthen her back. Over  
the next two years, her energy levels and 
appetite continued to improve. She was seen 
once a year until she died at age 86. The 
cause of death was unknown.Sheila was a 41-year-old human resources 
manager. She had been diagnosed nine 
months before her consultation with a 
malignant melanoma on her left breast. The 
growth was removed, followed by another.  
She was worried about a melanoma on  
her right foot, and she also complained  
of a recurrent sore throat, premenstrual 
problems, and joint pain. On examination, 
she had tenderness in the left breast  
and lower abdomen, and a melanoma  
on the left foot.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Sheila had been insecure as a child despite  
a supportive family. She had a successful 
career, but her ﬁrst husband had been violent. 
She was now remarried, but her husband had 
had a mild heart attack, and Sheila was angry 
that her new-found happiness was threatened. 
She was open, vital, friendly, and enthusiastic. 
Despite appearing conﬁdent, she needed 
reassurance. She was businesslike, 
competent, and thrived on the stress of  
a high-powered job.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Sheila had a good appetite. She craved 
sweet foods, especially before menstruation. 
She liked salt, the fat on meat, and acidic 
and spicy foods, but not vegetables. She  
had begun to modify her diet.
GENERAL DETAILS
Sheila felt worse after a bath and for  
being overheated, which made her skin  
itch. She was better for walking in the open  
air. Talking sometimes exhausted her.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Sheila was prescribed Sulphur  and advised  
to reduce her workload and take beta-
carotene and vitamin C. She also went on  
a variation of the Gerson diet. Within six 
months, she felt a lot better, her menstrual 
periods had improved, and the joint pain she 
had experienced had gone. The melanomas 
on her feet were noninvasive and surgery  
was not required. Sheila was also suffering 
from irritable bowel syndrome. Nutritional 
supplements helped, but symptoms returned 
if Sheila’s work became too stressful. A year 
later, the Sulphur  was repeated because of 
further menstrual problems, but ﬁve years  
on Sheila has had no further melanomas.

210 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
LOCATION OF THE LIMBIC SYSTEM  
The limbic system forms a boundary 
between the cortical and midbrain 
areas such as the thalamus and 
mammillary bodies.
COMPONENTS OF THE LIMBIC SYSTEM  The various 
parts of this circular system are extremely 
important in the expression of human basic 
instincts, drives, and emotions. The links between 
the limbic system and sensory structures help  
to explain why a sense of smell can evoke  
a memory or emotion.Cerebral cortex
Cingulate gyrus
Midbrain
Spinal cord
Cingulate gyrus 
modifies behavior and 
emotions
Fornix transmits 
information from limbic 
areas to mammillary 
bodies
Olfactory bulbs—
concerned with sense 
of smell—connect with 
limbic system
Amygdala influences behavior, 
activities including eating and  
sex, and emotions
Mammillary body transmits 
information to and from 
fornix and thalamusHippocampus  
is involved with 
learning
Parahippocampal gyrus 
helps modify expression 
of emotions
Spinal cordThe limbic system lies in the midbrain area. 
The word “limbic” means “border” or 
“boundary ,” and the limbic system forms  
the border between the higher, more 
complex, mental processes and emotional 
facilities of the cerebral cortex—the folded 
gray matter in the outer brain—and less 
complex centers of the brain, such as the 
hypothalamus, which control automatic body 
functions. Unlike less complex parts of the 
brain, where information received  (see page 
178) undergoes only rudimentary filtering,  
in higher areas of the brain, information from 
the peripheral nervous system is subjected  
to elaborate perception processes involving 
memory , decision-making, and other  
thought processes.
The limbic system plays a role in the 
expression of instinctive responses relating  
to survival, emotions, and the effects of mood 
on behavior, and the activities of what  
are known as neurotransmitters—a sort  
of chemical messenger. Some of these are 
mood enhancers, and a deficiency may 
contribute to depression.
Complex interactions
The highly complex nature of interactions 
that take place in the brain, together with 
consciousness, higher emotions, and spiritual 
feelings, produce unique and complex 
patterns of behavior. The expression of grief, 
for example, differs greatly from individual  
to individual. It is therefore difficult to draw  
a line between balance and imbalance on 
mental or emotional levels. In addition, 
mental health is determined largely by  
what is acceptable or tolerable either to an 
individual or to the society in which they  
live. Many mental and emotional problems, 
such as phobias, are rooted in childhood 
experiences, and are affected by illnesses and 
stress. In tackling and solving mental and 
emotional problems, a person often has to 
recognize and come to terms with factors that 
make them what they are.MIND & EMOTIONS
A great deal is already known about the location of certain 
mental functions in different areas of the brain. There 
remain many gaps in this knowledge, however, especially 
concerning the nature of the emotions and consciousness, and the links between brain activity and psychiatric illness. 
The workings of the body , mental functions, and the 
expression of emotions are believed to be closely linked  
by a part of the brain known as the limbic system.
How the limbic system may work

•211 MIND & EMOTIONS
Symptoms
• Intense anxiety , even a panic attack, when 
faced with the object of the phobia.
• Possible depression.
• Possible obsessive-compulsive behavior in 
order to avoid the perceived harmful effects  
of the feared object.
• Possible attempt to relieve the anxiety by 
consuming alcohol or drugs.
Causes
A phobia may be the result of a personal past 
experience that was extremely unpleasant,  
or it may be “inherited”—from a parent,  
for example. It may be a fear that has been 
transferred from another object or set of 
circumstances, or dredged up from the 
collective unconscious—a term that is used  
to describe the collective memory of the 
human species. Occasionally , phobias can  
be due to organic disease such as epilepsy  
or to a brain tumor.
There are various types of phobias.  
These include a fear of animals such as 
dogs, mice, spiders, or snakes, or a fear  
of situations, such as enclosed spaces 
(claustrophobia), or open or public places 
(agoraphobia). Social phobias involve a 
dread of being in public, and anxiety  
about being observed by other people.  
They may lead ultimately to an inability  
to speak or perform in public, to eat  
out in a restaurant, or even, in severe  
cases, to use any public facilities at all.
Conventional care
If, on examination, no organic cause of  
a phobia is found, antianxiety drugs such  
as tranquilizers may be prescribed. More 
commonly , antidepressant drugs are given, 
especially the “new” selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as Prozac. 
These drugs are often combined with some 
form of behavioral therapy . This may involve 
desensitization techniques, whereby the person 
is increasingly exposed to the object of fear 
while, at the same time, being instructed  
in relaxation techniques.Homeopathic medicine
Just as a person’s psychological state provides 
clues about remedies for physical conditions, 
with a condition such as phobia it is often the 
accompanying physical symptoms that indicate 
a specific constitutional remedy  (see page 18) .
Argentum nit.  is prescribed for multiple phobias 
associated with anxiety neuroses that originate 
in previous experiences. Calc. carb.  may be 
used to treat fears of heights and open spaces; 
while Calc. phos.  is often prescribed for phobias 
centered around school. Phosphorus  is used for 
fears that develop into phobias when the 
sufferer spends too much time alone. Other 
constitutional remedies include Aurum met. , 
Graphites , Ignatia , Lycopodium , Nat. carb. , 
Psorinum , Sepia , and Stramonium.
 Remedies given for specific symptoms 
include Borax , for fear of heights associated 
with a sensation of falling; Sulphur , when a fear 
of heights is associated with great giddiness; 
and Gelsemium , for a fear of appearing in public 
associated with weak limbs. Anacardium or .   
is used to treat the sensation of having a plug 
in the stomach, especially in performers;  
and Aconite  is given for a fear of dying  
with palpitations.
Lifestyle
Particularly in the case of claustrophobia, 
agoraphobia, and some animal phobias, if the 
motivation is strong enough, it may be possible 
to desensitize oneself by very gradual exposure 
to the object of fear. It is advisable at the same 
time to learn simple breathing or relaxation 
techniques, or practice yoga, meditation, or tai 
chi. Breathing techniques are able to defuse 
anxiety when it threatens to overwhelm. Drugs 
and alcohol should not be used in an attempt to 
suppress fear since this may lead to dependence.Maria, 24, was phobic about having 
contracted AIDS. She was unable to touch 
anything for fear of passing it to others  
and suffering unbearable guilt as a result. 
Maria’s fears had been exacerbated after 
she terminated a pregnancy, causing her  
to feel extremely guilty.
PERSONAL DETAILS
Maria had been the victim of bullying at 
school. She had left university because  
of depression and agoraphobia. She was 
sensitive, lacked conﬁdence, and felt 
detached from herself. She would decide  
on a course of action, but would then doubt 
that she could see it through. She had 
received psychiatric help.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Maria craved sweet foods, vinegar, and  
fat, particularly the fat on meat. She hated 
licorice, and avocados and bananas upset 
her digestion. She felt as though there was 
a plug at the end of her gullet.
GENERAL DETAILS
Maria felt generally unwell after studying  
or emotional stress. She disliked drafts and 
the open air—particularly if it was cold—  
and was sensitive to strong smells. She  
felt worse in the morning and evening, but 
better for eating and hot baths. She was 
prone to eczema on her wrists, and had lost 
more than 20 lb (9 kg) in weight over  
nine months.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Maria was given Anacardium or.  and 
advised to write about the termination  
to release her suppressed feelings. One 
month later, she felt better and was less 
depressed. She was better able to make 
decisions, except before menstruation.  
She was given Alumina  to take 
premenstrually. Soon after Maria went into 
dramatic decline, having learned that the 
father of the baby she had lost might move 
into the area. She felt angry, guilty, and 
hurt. Anacardium or.  was repeated and, 
with behavioral therapy, she was able to 
overcome her phobia. It recurred brieﬂy,  
but over the next few months, with Lac can.  
for fatigue and headaches that she had 
developed and repeat doses of Anacardium 
or., Maria made a full recovery.• If a person is feeling suicidal, contact their 
doctor or a counseling service immediately.
• If simple fear is greatly interfering with 
daily activities, consult a doctor.CAUTIONCASE HISTORY PHOBIAS
A phobia is a fear so disabling that it affects a person’s ability to cope with everyday 
life. Minor phobias are extremely common, but most people learn either to keep 
them in check or to overcome their fears. Someone who is seriously phobic will be 
overtaken by an intense, irrational fear when confronted by the object of their phobia.

212 •SERIOUS AILMENTS
Symptoms
• Slow thinking, inability to concentrate, 
indecision, general lack of interest, and 
recurrent thoughts about death.
• Increase or decrease in appetite or weight, 
slowing down of movement, and loss of energy .
Causes
Depression may have an obvious external cause, 
such as the death of a loved one. It may follow  
a viral infection, childbirth, or be caused  
by chemical imbalances in the body . These 
may occur naturally—for example, due to an 
underactive thyroid gland—or result from 
taking prescribed drugs, such as the 
contraceptive pill or sleeping pills, or from drug 
or alcohol addiction. Periods of depression may 
alternate with impulsive, energetic behavior—a 
condition known as manic depression. There is 
an affliction called seasonal affective disorder 
(SAD), in which people become depressed in 
winter, possibly due to insufficient sunlight.
More often, however, depression is a spiritual 
problem, involving a negative attitude to life 
that leads to feelings of fear, anger, guilt, and 
frustration, possibly accompanied by a sense  
of persecution, loneliness, and hopelessness. 
Severely depressed people may become suicidal, 
or experience delusions. Long-term depression 
may result from childhood trauma such as the 
death of a parent.
Conventional care
Mild depression may be treated with 
antidepressant drugs, sometimes together  
with psychotherapy or psychoanalysis.  
Severe depression is still treated with 
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), but only 
after all other methods have failed.
Homeopathic medicine
Most homeopathic practitioners treat 
depression constitutionally . Remedies  
are determined largely by an individual’s 
symptoms  (see page 18) . It may be the case 
that if emotional problems are alleviated, 
physical problems come to the fore  (see page 19). Aurum met.  is associated with the kind  
of despair that might lead to suicide; while 
Causticum  is indicated for a feeling of loss of 
control. China  is prescribed for low spirits 
following menstruation or associated with 
neuralgic pain; and Lachesis  is given for 
premenstrual or menopausal depression.  
Nat. mur .  is used for depression associated 
with the suppression of grief. Other remedies 
prescribed constitutionally include Arsen. alb. , 
Calc. carb. , Graphites , Lycopodium , Nat. carb. , 
Platina , Pulsatilla , Sepia , Sulphur , and Thuja.
Specific remedies include Ignatia , when 
depression results from bereavement or the 
breakup of a relationship; or Cadmium sulph. , 
following a viral illness such as mononucleosis 
that produces a lack of energy . Nux vomica  is 
used when there is great irritability , extreme 
chilliness, and overcriticism of others; while 
Aconite  is often given for the sudden onset of 
depression following a fright or shock, and 
which is linked with a fear of death.
Lifestyle
If minor depression is brought on by overwork 
or stress, time-management techniques will 
provide for the prioritization of tasks and time 
out for relaxation and the pursuit of interests.  
A sense of isolation can be reduced by taking  
up an interest that involves meeting new people. 
Those often confined to the home should 
arrange to go out frequently . Mild depression 
can be helped by dietary changes, especially  
the elimination of caffeine and the inclusion  
of vitamin and mineral supplements. Some 
prescribed drugs may have depressive side-
effects. It might be worth consulting a doctor 
with a view to changing the prescription.Medically speaking, depression is more than the sadness many people feel 
periodically . It combines despondency , hopelessness, apathy , and a lack of  
well-being, and can persist for some time. There may be physical symptoms.  
In parts of the developed world, one person in 25 feels depressed enough  
at some point in their life to seek professional help.DEPRESSIONCASE HISTORY
Rosa, a 30-year-old Argentinian, had been 
depressed for about a year. The depression 
had started postpartum, but she attributed 
it initially to an exhausting house move six 
months before. She was tearful, anxious, 
and fearful that she might kill her children. 
She felt physically and mentally exhausted, 
was too depressed to answer the telephone, 
and felt she would never recover. She was 
taking antidepressant drugs.
PERSONAL DETAILS
At the age of 19, Rosa had married an 
Englishman and moved to England. She 
described herself as a very organized 
perfectionist. She was sensitive to those 
close to her to the extent of having 
prophetic dreams about them, particularly 
her children.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Rosa was often very thirsty and loved cold 
fruit juices and milk, ice cream, and salty 
and spicy foods. She disliked fruits,  
warm foods and drinks, coffee, onions,  
and tomatoes.
GENERAL DETAILS
Rosa could only sleep lying on the right  
side. She felt faint if she put her hands in 
cold water, and suffered indigestion and 
constipation. She had headaches before 
thunderstorms. She was better for catnaps 
and massage.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
On the basis of her digestive problems and 
irrational fears, Rosa was given Argentum  
nit. Her digestion and energy levels improved, 
but she developed headaches, for which  
she was given Bryonia . She was put on a 
lacto-vegetarian diet and advised to have 
physiotherapy for muscle spasms in her neck. 
She stopped taking the antidepressants, but 
felt weepy and irritable. Over a few months 
she took doses of Pulsatilla , Ammonium carb. , 
Coffea , and Phosphorus , the last of which 
made her feel much better. On visiting 
Argentina she felt extremely well, but 
a signiﬁcant decline on her return revealed 
great homesickness. Phosphorus  revived her 
and she took a part-time job. A car accident 
and two stress-related illnesses set her back, 
but again she responded to Phosphorus ,  
and is on the whole no longer depressed.CAUTION
• If symptoms of depression last for  
more than a month, consult a doctor.
• If a depressed person is talking  
about suicide, alert their doctor or  
a counseling service.

•213 MIND & EMOTION
Symptoms of stages
• Initial sense of unreality or numbness.
• Refusal to believe that the loss has occurred, 
with hallucinations of a loved one or the 
feeling that they are present. This can last for 
up to three months.
• Series of complex emotions such as guilt  
(for example, for not spending more time with 
the lost person) and anger (for example, with 
God for taking the person or with the doctors 
for not doing enough to save the deceased’s 
life), leading to despair and depression, 
possibly associated with bowel upsets, mental 
disorders, and even a susceptibility to suicide.
• State of depression with a tendency to 
increase the use of drugs or alcohol, sleeping 
problems, general feelings of a lack of well-
being, agitation, and tearfulness. Eventually , 
life becomes bearable, and even enjoyable,  
but the whole process may take up to two 
years or more. There is some evidence that the 
death of a partner may increase the chance of 
death in the bereaved.
Conventional care
Treatment of long-term depression may  
require the involvement of a psychiatrist,  
in conjunction with antidepressant drugs, 
psychotherapy , and counseling. Help may  
also be obtained from a variety of support 
groups and religious organizations.
Homeopathic medicine
Homeopathic remedies can help at each  
stage of the grieving process. If a person  
does not appear to be recovering, however, 
constitutional treatment may be necessary , the 
remedy depending upon individual symptoms  
(see page 18) . Aurum met.  is indicated for those 
who are grieving over the loss of a loved one 
or the failure of a business. Causticum  is given 
for chronic, long-term grief and feelings akin 
to grief that are triggered by childbirth; Ignatia  
is used to treat the initial impact of grief; and 
Phosphoric ac.  is used in the treatment of grief 
associated with great exhaustion. Staphysagria  
is indicated for suppressed grief that is linked 
to embarrassment or humiliation. Other remedies prescribed constitutionally  
include Lachesis , Nat. mur . , and Phosphorus.
Remedies specifically for the early stages  
of grief include Arnica , when the grieving 
person wants to be left alone, insists they are 
all right, rejects physical comfort, and displays 
the reactions of a person in shock; Aconite ,  
if there is great fear and the person is on the 
verge of collapse, having witnessed a violent 
death for example; and Opium , when the 
bereaved is literally numb with grief, and  
is very frightened by the death of their loved 
one. In the later stages of grief, Nux vomica   
is indicated when there is great anger and 
criticism of others, and Pulsatilla  is prescribed 
for tearfulness at the slightest provocation, 
insomnia, and recurrent colds accompanied  
by yellow or green catarrh.
Lifestyle
The most important thing for a grieving person 
to do is to express their emotions. If they have 
difficulty talking about their problems, they 
should write down their thoughts, paint a 
picture, or use some other form of expression. 
Bottling up emotions may lead to chronic 
depression or lowered resistance to physical 
illnesses. Relaxation techniques or massage 
may also be of great benefit.
It is also important that someone who  
is grieving is kind to and patient with 
themselves. They may believe that life  
will never be the same again, but time  
does heal, and their anguish will lessen.  
If progress through the grieving process  
is slow, however, talking to a counselor  
who has received specific training in  
dealing with grief, such as those working  
for support groups, is advisable.Grief is a perfectly natural reaction to the loss of a loved one, a pet, a job,  
a house, or anything in which a great amount of emotion has been invested. The 
grieving process has definite stages through which most individuals must pass in 
order to come to terms with their loss and resolve the situation satisfactorily .GRIEFCASE HISTORY
Celia was 54 and was seen after her 
daughter had drowned while on vacation in 
Italy. Celia was distraught. She described 
feeling terriﬁed upon waking at the 
realization that her daughter was dead,  
and feared that she was losing her sanity. 
She had received a lot of support from  
her church and did not want to take 
conventional drugs.
PERSONAL DETAILS
It was impossible to assess Celia at ﬁrst 
due to her appalling grief. Normally, she 
would not be seen to cry, would bottle up 
her feelings, and be reluctant to conﬁde in 
others. She hated fuss, but became irritated 
if not shown any attention. Celia felt that 
she had to be strong for others in times  
of crisis. Her greatest fear was of her  
home being broken into.
FOOD PREFERENCES
Celia craved salty and acidic foods, and 
liked starchy foods, but nothing slimy,  
such as shellﬁsh. She disliked rich foods, 
meats, and coffee.
GENERAL DETAILS
Celia felt better in the open air on cool 
days, but was exhausted by heat. She  
was worse if her eyes got tired, and was 
sensitive to noise.
PRESCRIPTION & FOLLOW-UP
Celia was treated with Phosphoric ac.  A month 
later, she was still feeling guilty about her 
daughter’s death and was given Nat. mur.   
This relieved the guilt, but Celia missed her 
daughter terribly. She tried several Bach 
remedies, and gradually improved until the 
anniversary of the death, when she developed 
cystitis. For this she was given Pulsatilla.  Over 
several years she was treated homeopathically 
for a variety of ailments, including high blood 
pressure caused by the stress of caring for 
her granddaughter. Nat. mur.  and relaxation 
therapy helped, but she also had to take 
hypotensive drugs. She was generally well 
until her son committed suicide 12 years 
after his sister’s death. Celia sank into deep 
despair, angry that her family had been made 
to suffer so much. She was prescribed Ignatia  
and then Nat. mur.  over four months, and was 
able to work through her anger and the 
depression that followed.CAUTION
• If grief lasts for more than 18 months, 
seek professional help.
• If a depressed person is talking  
about suicide, alert their doctor or  
a counseling service.



homeopathic 
self-help

216 •
CHOOSING A REMEDY
Homeopathic remedies can be used effectively and safely by  
laypeople to treat many minor ailments and injuries. Careful 
observation enables a person to select a remedy to match their 
symptoms. While not necessarily providing an instant cure,  
a homeopathic remedy is believed to encourage the body’s  HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
A person must first decide whether or not  
it is safe to self-prescribe. Some symptoms  
(see Red-light symptoms,  page 9 ) may be 
indicative of a serious ailment and require the 
immediate attention of a conventional doctor.  
If pharmaceutical drugs are already being taken, 
it may be necessary to consult a doctor before 
considering additional medication. Babies and 
small children, pregnant women, the elderly , 
and those with chronic medical conditions need 
careful consideration in terms of self-help 
treatment ( see Safety issues , page 9 ).
Identifying symptoms
A diagnostic picture needs to be compiled in 
order to self-prescribe. A person must describe 
the characteristics of his or her symptoms (  see 
right) or, if prescribing for someone else, make a 
note of what can be seen or heard, and what is 
reported by the patient. Some symptoms may be associated with other manifestations of an 
ailment, or with a particular state of mind. A 
fever may develop after a person becomes wet 
and chilled, for example; a headache may follow 
a head injury; or diarrhea may be linked  
with anxiety .
Building symptom pictures
Armed with a “symptom picture,” a person can 
proceed to the homeopathic directory  (see pages 
218–69)  in which symptom descriptions can  
be compared and suitable remedies identified. 
Some symptoms are common to several 
ailments. A sore throat may be indicative of  
a cold, influenza, or laryngitis. It may be 
necessary , therefore, to study the symptom 
pictures of several ailments, comparing the 
accompanying physical symptoms and 
psychological symptoms listed. The remedy lists 
in the self-help section that follows are not 
EXAMPLES:  pain, soreness, inﬂammation, skin eruption, 
itching, bleeding, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, sore throat, 
cough, fever, fainting, dizziness, headache.
EXAMPLES:  perspiration, chilliness, great thirst, desire for or 
aversion to certain foods, loss of appetite, sensitivity to 
touch, weak limbs, coated tongue, swollen glands.
EXAMPLES:  location in the body, sudden or gradual onset, 
constant or intermittent occurrence, frequency of recurrence.
EXAMPLES:  restlessness, irritability, anger, anxiety, 
tearfulness, self-pity, emotional oversensitivity, indifference, 
desire to be alone, irrational fears, desire for sympathy.
EXAMPLES:  injury, viral infection, bacterial infection, exposure 
to extremes of temperature or strong wind, stress, anxiety, 
grief, overwork.
EXAMPLES:  warmth or cold, fresh air, application of hot or cold 
compresses, sitting or standing, lying in a particular way, 
physical or mental exertion, emotional stress.What are your most obvious 
physical symptoms?
Are main symptoms 
accompanied by less  
acute symptoms?
What are the characteristics 
of your symptoms?
Do you have any 
psychological symptoms?
Are you aware of any obvious 
cause of the symptoms?
Do your symptoms get  
better or worse under  
certain conditions?DIAGNOSTIC CHECKLISTexhaustive, but are common examples of 
homeopathic treatment for minor ailments. It is 
not necessary to exhibit all the symptoms listed, 
nor to match all the better or worse factors, for 
a remedy to be suitable. One can be chosen on 
the basis of the main symptoms, the likely 
cause, and onset characteristics.
T ypes of remedy
Lactose tablets are the most common form  
of homeopathic remedy , although sucrose 
tablets are available for those who are  
lactose-intolerant. Dissolved under the tongue,  
a remedy enters the bloodstream directly . 
Remedies come in different forms  (see below , 
left), and choice depends upon personal 
preference or aptitude for taking medication  
(see Administering remedies,  page 271 ). 
Homeopathic mother tinctures can be diluted  
to make soothing solutions  (see page 271) , and 
ointments and creams can be applied directly . 
Biochemic tissue salts are minerals that are 
taken singly or in combination to treat common 
ailments. They can be used on their own or 
with other homeopathic remedies.
Promoting recovery
It is best to take only one homeopathic remedy 
at a time. Repeating the dosage relies on being 
able to assess whether or not a remedy has 
worked and symptoms have improved. It is also 
advisable to follow certain guidelines  (see page 
176). All remedies are best combined with good 
nutrition, a low-stress environment, exercise, 
and emotional and intellectual states that 
promote balanced body systems.Conducting self-prescription
FORMS OF HOMEOPATHIC REMED Y Homeopathic 
remedies are available in different potencies (see 
page 28) and a variety of forms; from left to right, 
tablets, pilules, granules, and powder.self-healing mechanisms and nurture a sense of well-being, 
good energy levels, and a resistance to ill health. A remedy 
can be helped to work by adopting a lifestyle that will 
promote good health and a positive outlook.

•217 HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
EATING FOR HEALTH
• Obtain protein from vegetarian sources rather than 
meat and dairy products.
• Eat foods that are rich in vitamins and minerals  
or take supplements.
• Cut down on reﬁned carbohydrates, salt, animal fats, 
sugar, yeast, and processed foods.
• Drink plenty of ﬂuids.
• Reduce consumption of caffeine and alcohol.
• Eat regular meals.
• Lose weight if necessary.
• Consult a dietician about speciﬁc needs.
• Include plenty of ﬁber in the diet.
• Use healthy cooking methods—for example, broiling 
rather than frying.
IMPROVING SURROUNDINGS
• Prohibit smoking at home and at work.
• Reduce the risk of allergies by keeping the home  
dust-free.
• Use environmentally friendly household products rather 
than strong, chemical-based substances that are 
potentially irritating.
• Avoid using heavily perfumed toiletries and  
skin-care products.
• Avoid polluted or noisy environments.
• Humidify or dehumidify rooms as necessary.
• Make rooms draft-free but with adequate ventilation.
• Wear natural ﬁbers.
• Create an area that is conducive to relaxation.
MANAGING STRESS
• Take periods of rest during the day and get enough 
sleep at night.
• Include periods of relaxation and exercise  
in a daily routine.
• Prioritize and organize tasks.
• Delegate, and learn to say “no” to extra work.
• Eat properly and regularly and get plenty of fresh air.
• Make time for leisure activities and socializing with 
family and friends.
• Take a vacation.
• Cultivate a positive attitude to all things.
• Face up to problems rather than putting  
them off.STAYING IN SHAPE
• Learn breathing techniques to maximize the beneﬁts  
of exercise.
• Include exercise in a daily routine—for example, climb 
stairs rather than take an elevator.
• Plan a weekly exercise program.
• Aim to improve energy levels, brain power, and mood.
• Choose activities for speciﬁc purposes such as muscle 
coordination, strength, and endurance, cardiovascular 
endurance, or ﬂexibility.
• Always warm up before exercising and stretch out 
afterward.
• Use exercise as a means of getting time to yourself,  
or meeting people, or as a challenge.
TREATMENTS FOR THE BODY
• Breathing and relaxation techniques: for relief of pain 
and stress-related symptoms.
• Touch therapies: pressure or massage for relaxation, 
relief of ailments, and promotion of health (for example, 
aromatherapy, reﬂexology).
• Manipulation: for disorders of the spine, joints, 
and muscles, and for body alignment (for example, 
physiotherapy, osteopathy).
• Physical reeducation: for tension release, body 
alignment, and improved posture and ﬂexibility (for 
example, Hellerwork, Alexander technique).
• Movement therapies: for increased vitality and 
promotion of self-healing (for example, tai chi, yoga, 
dance movement therapy).
TREATMENTS FOR THE MIND
• Breathing and relaxation techniques: for managing 
stress and treating mental conditions including 
phobias, insomnia, and depression.
• Meditation: focusing on feelings of inner peace and 
fulﬁllment rather than on thought processes for relief  
of stress and promotion of well-being.
• Psychotherapy and counseling: talking to a skilled listener 
as a treatment for mental and emotional disorders.
• Hypnotherapy: use of a trancelike state of 
consciousness to inﬂuence physical and mental 
conditions—for example, desensitizing pain.
• Creative therapies: use of sounds, music, or art to 
treat mental and emotional disorders.COMPLEMENTARY LIFESTYLE GUIDEA homeopathic remedy helps the body heal itself. This self-healing can be encouraged, and future health and well-being 
promoted, by a series of measures put into place alongside the treatment  (see below) . The importance of a good, balanced 
diet and adequate exercise is obvious, but many other aspects of a person’s life, such as how they combine work and play , 
whether or not they have a network of family and friends, and their general outlook on life, can help or hinder healing.HELPING REMEDIES WORK

218 •
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The nervous system is a huge and immensely complex 
structure  (see page 178) , with the brain as the control center. 
The brain contains up to 14 billion nerve cells and weighs 
about 3 lb (1.5 kg). It receives stimuli from inside and outside the body , processes the information received, and 
then sends instructions in response to that information via 
the rest of the nervous system to various parts of the body . 
As a result of the complexity of the nervous system, nerve HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
HEADACHES
A constant headache may be indicative of a serious ailment, but 
most headaches are due to anxiety , stress, physical tension, fatigue, 
stimulants, allergy , eye strain, or low blood sugar. Pain results from 
strain on the head or neck muscles or congestion (too much blood) 
in the blood vessels supplying them.
SELF-HELP If pain is related to the neck, see a physiotherapist.
CAUTION  If a headache follows a head injury or if there is drowsiness, 
light intolerance, or vomiting, call 911 . If there is a temperature of 
more than 100°F (38°C) with light intolerance, or a headache behind 
one eye with blurred vision, see a doctor within two hours. If a 
headache has lasted for several days, with nausea and vomiting,  
see a doctor within 12 hours.
MIGRAINES
An intermittent, severe headache may be a migraine, which  
usually occurs on one side of the head, and is associated with 
nausea, vomiting, blurred vision or other visual disturbances such 
as zigzags, light intolerance, and sometimes tingling or numb arms. 
Symptoms are caused by the alternate constriction and swelling of 
arteries supplying the brain. Stress, low blood sugar, and food 
allergy are common triggers. Migraine affects women more than 
men, especially premenstrually .
SELF-HELP  Avoid stress and learn relaxation techniques  (see page 217) . 
Consult a dietician, or eliminate trigger foods such as chocolate, citrus 
fruits, and cheese from the diet for about four weeks. Reintroduce 
them and observe any changes in symptoms. If you smoke, stop. If you 
feel a migraine coming on, splash your face with cold water and lie 
down quietly for an hour.
CAUTION  Follow the same cautionary advice as for a headache  (above) .
SCIATICA
This term describes pain that is transmitted along the sciatic ner ve, 
the principal nerve in the leg and is connected to nerves in the 
pelvis and spine. Sciatica pain in the distribution of the sciatic 
nerve may be felt in the thigh or buttock and below the knee. It is 
usually referred pain from the nerve root or from an abnormal joint 
such as degeneration of a disk from osteoarthritis (see page 196 ) or 
from a prolapsed intervertebral disk, or from spinal stenosis. Sciatic 
pain is exacerbated by bending, sneezing, or coughing.
SELF-HELP  Osteopathy, physiotherapy, or acupuncture may relieve the 
condition. Rest the back well by lying ﬂat on a fairly hard mattress 
with a ﬁrm pad 2–3 in (5–7 cm) thick beneath the head. Try placing  
a hot-water bottle on the affected area. Learn how to lift and carry 
heavy objects correctly. Swimming may be beneﬁcial.• Pain may feel like a tight band around the head
• Head may feel full and heavy as though the 
brain is being pushed out through the forehead
• Possible pulsating pain in the head and teeth
• Possible hot, bursting pain that is worse on  
the left side
• Head may feel as though it has been beaten
• Dizziness
• Possible pain in the back of the head as 
though the skull is going to burst
• Possible violent, jerking pain or dull, shooting 
pain in the left side of the brain
• Pain on the right side of the head
• Sensation as though the temples are being 
screwed into each other
• Pain made worse by concentration
• Possible dizziness
• Headache preceded by numbness and tingling 
in the lips, nose, and tongue
• Head feels stuffy, and as though the brain is 
being hit by tiny hammers, possibly with dizziness
• Pain over the eyes and on top of the head
• Head feels as though it is about to burst
• Pain starts in the right temple
• Possible weeping of the right eye
• Bruised sensation in the forehead
• Difﬁculty straightening the affected leg 
because of contractions of the hamstring
• Hip pain as though the tendons are too short
• Tearing pain along the front of the thigh
• Lopsided walking style
• Shooting pain down the right leg to the foot
• Possible numbness and weakness in the leg
• Muscles are contracted
• Cramplike pain in the hip
• Tearing pain • Cramps in the calf
• Numbness and tingling in the leg 
• Pain extends down the back of the affected leg 
when passing stoolsHeadache that comes  
on suddenly
Headache caused by 
drinking too much alcohol
Headache that is worse 
on the right side of  
the head
Throbbing, blinding 
headache
Headache with 
tearfulness
Sciatica that is worse 
when sitting
Sciatica that is worse in 
cold, damp weather
Sciatica that is relieved 
by heat and movementSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•219 NERVOUS SYSTEM
• Apprehension
• Fear of the future and of death
• Fear of crowds
• Restlessness and impatience
• Feeling of despair
• Mental dullness
• Extreme irritability
• Overcriticism of others
• Lack of conﬁdence
• Apprehension
• Memory appears to be failing
• Lack of concentration
• Sudden outbursts of anger
• Rejection of sympathy
• Desire to be left alone
• Symptoms associated with grief
• Tendency to dwell on  
unpleasant memories
• Tearfulness 
• Timidity
• Desire for sympathy  
and reassurance
• Melancholia
• Apprehension
• Desire to cry but inability to do so
• Discontentment
• Irritability • Embarrassment
• Symptoms associated with 
anger, especially if suppressed
• Anguish but no desire to talk
• Great restlessness
• Apprehension at night
• Anxiety, depression, 
hopelessness, and tearfulness• In fresh air
• For warmth
• For rest
• For perspiring
• For warmth
• For applying ﬁrm pressure  
to the head
• For washing the hair or applying 
cold compresses to the head
• For being alone in the evening
• For loosening tight clothing
• For movement
• In cool air
• For hot foods and drinks
• At night
• In fresh air
• For applying cold compresses to 
the head
• For fasting
• For lying down
• In cold, fresh, open air
• For gentle movement
• For crying
• In the open air
• For rapid movement
• For bending over when walking
• When lying down
• For sleep
• For applying ﬁrm pressure to the 
affected area
• For bending down • For heat
• For rest or gentle movement
• For heat
• For continuous movement
• For rubbing the affected area
• For stretching the limbs• In stuffy rooms
• For cold and drafts
• For a shock or fright
• For light or noise
• In cold, dry, or windy weather
• Between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m.
• For taking stimulants
• For eating
• For physical or mental exertion
• For noise
• For wearing tight clothing
• For overeating
• In stuffy rooms
• Between 4 a.m. and 8 a.m. and  
4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
• For warmth
• For movement
• In stuffy rooms
• For grief
• For warmth
• For rich or fatty foods
• In the evening
• During menstruation
• For walking around
• Between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m.
• In the evening
• When sitting down
• In cold, wet weather
• For emotional stress
• When lying on the pain-free side
• At night
• For rest • On moving for the ﬁrst 
time after rest
• For cold and damp
• After midnightAconite
(see page 32)  
30c every 10–15 minutes 
up to 6 doses
Nux vomica
(see page 63)  
6c every 10–15 minutes 
up to 6 doses
Lycopodium
(see page 59)  
6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses after ﬁrst signs
Nat. mur.
(see page 92)  
6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses after ﬁrst signs
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses after ﬁrst signs
Ammonium mur.
(see page 123)  
6c hourly 
up to 10 doses, or half-hourly  
if acute
Colocynthis
(see page 52)  
6c hourly 
up to 10 doses, or half-hourly if acute
Rhus tox.
(see page 162)  6c hourly 
up to 10 doses, or half-hourly  
if acutecells are vulnerable to damage and have little capacity for 
self-repair. Disorders of the brain and nervous system range 
from slight nerve twinges to traumatic events such as a 
stroke  (see page 187) . Serious ailments require immediate 
conventional treatment, but there is a role for homeopathy’s 
mind-and-body approach, especially during recuperation. Homeopathic treatment will follow exploration of 
imbalances within the body , and analysis of constitutional 
type (see page 176) . The prescribed remedies will treat  
the nervous system by calming the mind, thereby 
encouraging healing processes, as well as by  
addressing specific symptoms.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

 220 •
THE EYES
The eyes supply the brain with information from the outside 
world—along with the other sensory organs (the ears, nose, 
tongue, and skin)—and are complex, delicate mechanisms. 
The cornea and lens in each eye focus incoming rays of light, forming an image on the retina, a membrane covering the 
back of the inside of the eye. Millions of extremely sensitive 
nerve cells in the retina convert the image into suitable 
messages for transmission along the optic nerve to the brain. HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
EYE STRAIN
Eye strain can be caused by overwork or by working in poor  
light. Stress, especially following an emotional upset, can  
weaken the eye muscles and cause eye strain. The condition may 
manifest itself as a tightness around the eyes, or as difﬁculty in 
focusing on long-distance objects after focusing on near ones.
SELF-HELP  Apply dry, cold compresses to the eyes or bathe them  
with a euphrasia solution  (see below) . Rest the eyes by placing  
the palms lightly against closed eyes, thus relaxing them, for  
a couple of minutes.
CONJUNCTIVITIS
Inﬂammation of the conjunctiva results from infection (yellow 
discharge) or allergy (whites of the eyes are red and gritty).
SELF-HELP  Bathe the eyes with euphrasia solution (2 drops  
mother tincture added to a saltwater eyebath—1 tsp  
salt to ¾ cup boiled, cooled water). Rest the eyes,  
do not share a towel, and wash your hands after touching  
the eyes.
STYES
A stye is a small, pus-ﬁlled boil that forms at the base of an eyelash. 
It is caused by an infection and usually clears up by itself within 
about seven days, but it can be aggravated by tiredness. For 
recurrent styes, constitutional treatment  (see page 176)  is advisable.
SELF-HELP  Rest the eyes. Avoid touching the eyes, especially with 
dirty hands, and never squeeze a stye. If a stye persists, try hot-
spoon bathing: wrap cotton batting around the handle of a wooden 
spoon, dip it into very hot water, then place the cotton against the 
stye. Repeat several times.
TWITCHING EYELIDS
The eyelids may twitch when there is no other bodily twitching  
or trembling. This usually indicates tiredness or tension.
SELF-HELP  Increase the amount of sleep you get and take naps  
if necessary. Learn relaxation or meditation techniques.
WATERING EYES
Watering eyes are common in cold winds and drafts. If  
constant, this condition may be due to blocked tear ducts as  
a result of infection or injury to the bridge or sides of the nose.
SELF-HELP  Massage the sides of the nose to clear the tear ducts.
CAUTION  If discharge contains pus or if there is tenderness at the 
sides of the nose, see a doctor within 24 hours.• Dull, aching pain in the eyes when looking up, 
down, or sideways
• Eyes burn and feel strained after a prolonged 
period of studying or reading
• Eyes feel hot and are red
• Possible headache
• Eyes water continuously, which irritates the 
skin on the cheeks beneath them
• Eyelids are swollen and burning
• Frequent need to blink
• Little blisters may form inside the eyelids
• Bland nasal discharge
• Eyes are red and swollen
• Eyelids itch
• Small boils on the eyelids develop heads  
of pus
• Eyes are red, swollen, and painful
• Small boils on the eyelids develop  
heads of pus
• Spasmodic twitching of the eyelids
• Difﬁculty in reading because type seems  
to “swim” on the page
• Possible itching and burning of the eyelids
• Eyes water due to mild but persistent infection 
of the tear ducts that the body seems unable 
to overcome
• Lack of physical staminaEyes ache on movement
Burning eyes
Swollen eyelids with 
burning discharge
Inﬂamed eyes with  
itchy eyelids
Inﬂamed and painful eyes
Twitching with anxiety 
about health
Watering due to infection 
of tear ductSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER•

•221 THE EYES
• Aversion to sympathy  
and consolation
• Symptoms possibly associated 
with stress, particularly after the 
loss of a loved one
• Depression
• Lack of personal satisfaction
• Criticism of others
• Anxiety
• None apart from irritability due 
to discomfort of symptoms
• Aversion to answering questions
• Tendency to wake with a start
• Depression
• Self-pity
• Tearfulness
• Feelings of resentment or  
anger, especially concerning  
a loved one
• Possible tension brought on by 
anxiety about health
• Tendency to exaggerate small 
problems, even to the extent of 
fearing death
• Overexcitement at night
• Lack of conﬁdence
• Lack of mental stamina• In fresh air
• For fasting
• For applying cold compresses  
to the affected eye
• For movement
• For warmth
• For gently massaging the eyes
• When the eyes are closed
• For coffee
• For applying cold compresses  
to the affected area
• For resting the eyes
• For applying cold compresses  
to the affected area
• When lying down
• For sleep
• For warmth
• For applying warm compresses  
to the eyes
• In summer• In cold, thundery weather
• In drafts or hot sun
• By the sea
• For physical or mental exertion
• For emotional stress
• In cold, damp weather
• For rest
• When lying down
• For drinking alcohol
• In the evening
• Indoors
• For warmth
• For light
• In warm, windy weather
• For rich, fatty foods
• For hormonal changes such  
as those associated with puberty  
or pregnancy
• When the stye is touched
• For the suppression of emotions, 
especially following a quarrel
• Before thunderstorms
• For sexual intercourse
• In cold air and drafts
• In damp conditions
• For applying gentle pressure  
to the eyes
• For mental exertionNat. mur.
(see page 92)  
6c 4 times daily  
up to 7 days
Ruta
(see page 163)  
6c 4 times daily  
up to 7 days
Euphrasia
(see page 142)  
6c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
6c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Staphisagria
(see page 54)  
6c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Agaricus
(see page 33)  
6c every 4 hours  
up to 6 doses
Silica
(see page 97)  
6c 4 times daily  
up to 7 daysThe front of the eye is protected by another membrane—  
the conjunctiva. The eyes are continuously bombarded  
with atmospheric particles, such as spores, bacteria,  
viruses, chemicals, and air pollutants, which may give  
rise to irritation or infection. Complaints in the eyes  
may be exacerbated by fluctuations in temperature,  stress, and fatigue, all of which weaken the ability of the 
body’s immune system to fight infection. Homeopathic  
self-help remedies are particularly suitable for soothing  
tired, irritated, or infected eyes. Regular, standard eye tests 
are essential for maintaining healthy eyes and monitoring 
degeneration with age.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

222 •
THE EARS
The ears are intricate sensory organs that provide details to 
the brain about the body’s external experiences, as well as 
controlling balance. An ear has an outer, a middle, and an 
inner section, the first two being responsible for the collection and relaying of sound waves, while the third 
interprets them. The external folds of the ear lead into the 
ear canal, at the end of which is a membrane—the 
eardrum—which vibrates according to variations in air HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
EARACHES
Earaches can result from a buildup of wax in the ear or an infection 
of the outer, inner, or middle ear—after a cold, for example. They 
can worsen as a result of barotrauma (pressure damage) after ﬂying, 
or if there is catarrh in the eustachian tube  (see below) . Earaches 
may also occur as a result of infection in the outer ear following ear 
piercing. The body’s natural mechanisms for ﬁghting infection may 
be impeded if the ears are exposed to extremes of temperature.
SELF-HELP  Hold a covered hot-water bottle against the affected ear.
CAUTION  If an earache is associated with fever or discharge, see  
a doctor immediately. Consult a doctor about all types of earaches  
in children.
BLOCKAGE OF THE EUSTACHIAN TUBE
The eustachian tube may become blocked by catarrh resulting  
from an infection of the upper respiratory tract, a middle ear  
or adenoid infection, or tonsillitis; by swollen adenoids (which 
cover the opening to the eustachian tube at the back of the nose); 
or due to barotrauma after ﬂying.
SELF-HELP  To dislodge catarrh, inhale three drops of lemon  
juice up each nostril three times a day for ﬁve days, using a dropper. 
Do not do this if you are prone to nosebleeds.
CAUTION  If there is no improvement after seven days, consult  
a doctor within 48 hours.
TINNITUS
Tinnitus is a persistent noise in the ears, commonly ringing or 
roaring. It may be due to the presence of a foreign body in the ear 
canal, barotrauma after ﬂying, or taking certain drugs, especially 
aspirin. It may be brought on by inﬂuenza or aging, and is an 
occupational hazard for those employed in noisy workplaces.  
The condition may be accompanied by deafness and giddiness, 
tenderness as a result of pressure on the nerves at the base of  
the skull, or headache.
SELF-HELP  Place two drops of pure almond oil in each ear once a 
week. Reduce the stress that may be generated by this disorder by 
means of relaxation techniques  (see page 217) . Tinnitus may be 
exacerbated by neck problems, in which case consult an osteopath 
or physiotherapist.
CAUTION  If you cannot identify the cause of noise or discomfort in  
the ears, consult a doctor within 48 hours.• Acute, throbbing pain
• Extreme sensitivity to touch
• Bright red ear
• Throbbing pain
• High fever
• Dry mouth and throat
• Wide, staring eyes
• Pain resulting from pressure behind the 
eardrum pushing it out slightly
• Glands in the throat may be swollen and hard
• Painful, constricting feeling in the throat
• Deafness caused by the swelling of the 
eustachian tube
• Cracking noise in the ear on blowing the nose 
or swallowing
• Runny nose and coughing up of catarrh from 
the back of the throat
• Possible deafness or mufﬂed hearing and 
giddiness and nausea
• Noises in the ear heard as music or the 
buzzing of insects
• Singing or hissing noise resembling the sound 
of an aeolian harp
• Ears feel blocked and tingly
• Hearing is impaired
• Buzzing, especially in the left ear, sometimes 
accompanied by deafness and dizziness
• Deafness accompanied by a severe headache 
and violent noise in the ears
• Possible tenderness in the cervical or dorsal 
spine and pain in the headEarache with sharp pain
Throbbing earache  
with redness
Feeling of pressure 
behind the eardrum
Eustachian tube blockage 
with constricting feeling 
in the throat
Eustachian tube blockage 
with coughing up  
of catarrh
Roaring in the ears with 
difﬁculty in hearing
Tinnitus with blocked 
feeling in the ears
Buzzing in the ears  
with dizzinessSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER 

•223 THE EARS
• Extreme irritability and anger
• Emotional oversensitivity
• Sensitivity to even the slightest 
jarring of the body
• Restlessness and agitation 
that may be accompanied by 
hallucinations or violent outbursts
• Sensitivity to heat, light, noise, 
or touch
• Tearfulness and self-pity
• Desire for company
• In small children, constant 
desire for cuddles
• Restlessness and 
overexcitability
• Desire to keep constantly busy
• Obsessive checking to make 
sure things have not been 
forgotten
• Irritability
• Anger
• Discontent
• None apart from irritability or 
depression due to discomfort of 
symptoms
• Irritability, anxiety, intolerance, 
and mood swings
• Possible hallucinations
• Nervousness
• Nominal aphasia (difﬁculty in 
naming objects)
• Great anguish and ﬁts of anxiety, 
despair, and melancholia• For warmth
• For applying warm compresses to 
the head
• When the head is warmly wrapped
• When standing or sitting upright
• For applying cold compresses to 
the forehead
• For gentle movement
• In fresh air
• In cool, dry conditions
• In cold conditions
• For emotional stress
• For cold drinks
• For gently rubbing the ear
• For applying heat, especially dry 
heat, to the ear
• In the open air
• For applying pressure to the ear
• For yawning
• When bending forward• In cold air and drafts
• On undressing when chilled
• When the ear is touched
• When lying on the affected side
• When the head is chilled
• For movement, jarring, noise, 
light, or pressure
• When lying on the right side
• At night
• In hot, stuffy conditions
• In the evening
• When lying on the left side
• For prolonged standing
• For heat
• At night
• For rest
• In fresh air
• In drafts
• When lying down at night
• In damp conditions
• When the ear is touched
• For movement
• At night
• In cold air
• After breakfast
• For bathing
• At precise, regular intervals
• For cold
• Between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m.
• For touch
• For movementHepar sulph.
(see page 84)   
6c half-hourly  
until you see a doctor
Belladonna
(see page 39)   
30c half-hourly 
until you see a doctor
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)   
6c hourly up to 10 doses
Iodum
(see page 86)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 7 days
Kali. mur.
(see page 150)  
6c 4 times daily  
up to 7 days
Salicylic ac.
(see page 120)  
6c 3 times daily 
up to 14 days
Carbon sulph.
(see page 134)   
6c 3 times daily 
up to 14 days
China sulph.
(see page 136)   
6c 3 times daily  
up to 14 dayspressure caused by sound waves. Beyond the eardrum is the 
middle ear, where a series of small bones transforms 
vibrations so that they can pass through the liquid in the 
inner ear. From here, information is transmitted along the 
auditory nerve to the brain. The eustachian tube links the 
middle ear to the back of the nose and maintains the same air pressure on either side of the eardrum. The ears are 
susceptible to invasion by particles and microorganisms and 
are easily damaged, so any pain or other kind of discomfort 
should be investigated promptly . Homeopathic remedies can 
be of particular help in treating ailments linked to catarrh 
resulting from respiratory infections.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

224 •
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
With every breath we take, spores, viruses, bacteria,  
and microscopic particles of dust, smoke, and chemical 
pollutants enter the body . The nose moistens, warms, and 
filters air before it is drawn into the airway and lungs   (see page 180) . The respiratory system is therefore highly 
susceptible to the effects of atmospheric irritants. If the 
immune system is strong, it is able to ward off all but the 
most virulent infections. Colds, coughs, and influenza strike HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
HAY FEVER & ALLERGIC RHINITIS
Seasonal airborne irritants such as grass, tree, and ﬂower pollen cause 
the allergic reaction that is called hay fever. Mucous membranes lining 
the nose and eyes are mainly affected, but the ears, throat, and lungs 
may also become irritated. Symptoms include repeated sneezing, a 
runny nose, watering eyes, and itching of the eyes, nose, palate, and 
throat. Allergic rhinitis, or perennial rhinitis, is the name given to 
similar symptoms that occur year-round and are caused by other 
irritants, including dust mites and animal dander.
SELF-HELP  Avoid all known irritants. If symptoms are severe, try using 
air ﬁlters or ionizers in the home. Wear sunglasses and a hat when 
outdoors to shade your face. Eat lots of fresh, raw fruits and 
vegetables. Blow the nose gently; hard blowing may burst pollen 
grains in the nose and increase irritation. Rub a small dab of 
petroleum jelly inside each nostril a few times a day to prevent  
the nose from becoming dry and sore. Take combination H tissue 
salts (see page 216) .
COLDS
Colds are caused by viral infections of the respiratory tract. Early 
symptoms include a sore throat, watery catarrh, and sneezing. As  
a cold runs its course, the catarrh thickens and may become yellow 
in color. Colds are usually self-limiting, but a neglected cold may 
develop into a chest infection such as bronchitis  (see page 228) , or 
infection may spread to the ears  (see page 222) , sinuses  (see page 
226), throat  (see page 226) , or larynx  (see page 228) . Vulnerability  
to infection is increased by overwork and exhaustion, emotional 
stress—especially after a shock or a fright—and anxiety .
SELF-HELP  Rest and drink plenty of ﬂuids, especially hot water mixed 
with fresh lemon juice and a little honey. Eat plenty of fresh fruits  
and vegetables, and get some fresh air. Take combination Q tissue 
salts (see page 216) .
CAUTION  If there is pain in the throat, larynx, chest, sinuses, or ears, 
consult a doctor.
INFLUENZA
There are many different strains of the inﬂuenza virus, and the 
symptoms include fever, muscular aches and pains, headache, sore 
throat, and cough. Children, the elderly , smokers, and people with 
chronic diseases are the most likely to be seriously affected by it.
SELF-HELP  Rest and drink frequently, especially hot water mixed with 
fresh lemon juice and a little honey. Eat plenty of fresh fruits and 
vegetables, and take combination Q tissue salts  (see page 216) .  
CAUTION  If fever persists for four days, see a doctor.• Streaming, burning catarrh that may start in 
the left nostril and move to the right, and that 
makes the nostrils and upper lip sore
• Pain in the forehead
• Larynx feels as if it has hooks sticking in it
• Eyes stream with a bland discharge
• Thick, honey-colored catarrh follows 3 or 
4 days of continuous, violent sneezing 
• Nostrils are sore, red, and painful
• Burning throat and irritating cough
• Eyes are swollen and sensitive to bright light
• Thick, burning discharge from the eyes that 
irritates the skin on the cheeks beneath
• Bland catarrh from the nose
• Catarrh drips down the back of the throat
• Mouth feels hot
• Throat is inﬂamed
• Mild fever
• Nose may bleed
• Chilliness
• Runny nose by day, blocked nose by night
• Watering eyes and sneezing
• Headache
• Sore throat
• Violent sneezing and thin catarrh resembling 
the white of a raw egg
• Possible blocked nose
• Possible cold sores
• Chills running up and down the spine
• Shakiness and trembling, mainly in the legs
• Bursting headache that is better for urinating
• Fever with lack of thirst and fatigue • Sore throat
• High fever that comes on suddenly
• Flushed face 
• Bright red, sore throat
• Wide, staring eyesHay fever with  
burning catarrh
Hay fever with constant 
desire to sneeze
Hay fever in which mainly 
the eyes are affected
Cold that comes  
on slowly
Cold with irritability
Early stages of a cold 
with sneezing
Inﬂuenza with weakness
Inﬂuenza with high feverSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•225 RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
• None apart from irritability due 
to discomfort of symptoms
• Restlessness
• Anxiety and worry
• Possible hyperactivity in children
• None apart from irritability due 
to discomfort of symptoms
• Fear of losing touch with friends
• Talkativeness
• Excitability
• Irritability
• Overcriticism of others
• Desire to be left alone
• Aversion to sympathy
• Apprehension and worry about 
forthcoming events
• Brain feels dull and drowsy
• Confusion and delirium
• Horrible visions
• Violent outbursts• In cool rooms
• In fresh air
• For bathing
• For movement
• In the open air
• For eating
• For rest
• When lying down in a  
darkened room
• For coffee
• For applying cold compresses to 
the forehead
• For gentle exercise
• For lying down
• For warmth
• For sleep
• For applying ﬁrm pressure and 
warm compresses to the nose
• In the evening
• In fresh air
• For fasting
• For applying cold compresses to 
the sinuses
• In fresh air • For urinating
• For applying hot compresses to 
the back of the head and top of  
the neck
• When standing or sitting up
• In warm rooms• In warm rooms
• In cold or damp weather
• For warm foods and drinks
• For sneezing
• For warmth
• In dry weather
• For warmth
• In warm, windy weather
• For bright light
• Indoors
• In the evening
• For jarring and touch
• When lying on the right side
• In fresh air and sun
• Between 4 a.m. and 6 a.m.
• When overheated but  
not perspiring
• In dry, cold wind
• In public places
• Between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m.
• For emotional stress
• For spicy foods or stimulants
• At around 10 a.m.
• In cold, thundery weather
• For physical or mental exertion
• In drafts, sea air, or hot sun
• For noise, talking, or music
• In the sun • In humid conditions
• For emotional stress
• In the early morning and late  
at night
• For jarring and movement • At night
• For noise and light • In hot sun
• When lying on the right sideAllium cepa
(see page 34)  
6c as required 
up to 10 doses
Arsen. iod.
(see page 126)  
6c as required 
up to 10 doses
Euphrasia
(see page 142)  
6c as required 
up to 10 doses
Ferrum phos.
(see page 82)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 4 doses
Nux vomica
(see page 63)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 4 doses
Nat. mur.
(see page 92)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 4 doses
Gelsemium
(see page 144)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Belladonna
(see page 39)  
30c every 2 hours up to 10 doseseasily when the immune system is weak, making the body 
vulnerable. Variations in the efficiency of the immune system 
explain why only some of the people exposed to a cold 
actually catch it. The immune system may be impaired by 
poor diet, overindulgence, exposure to cold or windy 
weather, or being chilled or overheated. In addition, the body’s defenses are weakened by overwork, exhaustion, 
anxiety , and stress. A weak system also increases the 
possibility of allergic reactions to atmospheric particles. 
Homeopathy addresses imbalances in the immune system 
rather than fighting infection. Allergies may require 
constitutional homeopathic treatment  (see page 176) .
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

   226 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
CATARRH
Catarrh is the intermittent discharge of runny or viscous ﬂuid, or 
mucus, from the nose. This may alternate with a stuffy , blocked-up 
feeling. Catarrh may be a symptom of an infection, such as a cold 
or inﬂuenza  (see page 224) , or sinusitis  (see below) . Alternatively , 
catarrh may be part of an allergic reaction to a number of things, 
including pollen or dust  (see Hay fever,  page 224),  cigarette  
smoke, chemical pollution, gas or oil ﬁres, central heating or air-
conditioning systems, certain drugs, or cold and damp. These may 
cause irritation of the mucous membranes, which stimulates mucus 
production in an attempt to lubricate the membranes and remove 
the irritation. A cough  (see page 228)  may develop if catarrh drips 
down the back of the throat.
SELF-HELP Drink plenty of ﬂuids. Avoid eating dairy products, bread, 
and potatoes—which may increase mucus production—for a couple 
of weeks and make a note of any changes to symptoms. Take 
combination Q tissue salts  (see page 216) .
SINUSITIS
The sinuses are air-ﬁlled cavities in the bones around the nose. 
Sinusitis is inﬂammation of the mucous membranes lining the 
sinuses due to infection or allergy . The cavities may ﬁll up with 
mucus, creating pressure that in turn causes pain. Symptoms 
include a blocked nose, general malaise, possibly a headache  
over one or both eyes, and tender cheeks with pain resembling a 
toothache. The condition is aggravated by stress.
SELF-HELP Take care when blowing your nose: blow one nostril at  
a time. Humidify all rooms, and inhale steam. Rest, drink plenty  
of ﬂuids, and take combination Q tissue salts  (see page 216) .  
Avoid eating dairy products, bread, and potatoes. If you smoke,  
stop. Do not use decongestants repeatedly.
CAUTION If symptoms persist beyond 48 hours, consult a doctor.  
If you are in severe pain, see a doctor within 12 hours.
SORE THROAT
A relatively mild irritation or a more serious infection, such as 
laryngitis  (see page 228) , may produce a sore throat. Soreness may 
affect the whole throat or speciﬁc areas such as the larynx, tonsils, 
adenoids, pharynx, or vocal chords. Symptoms include a dry 
mouth and throat, discomfort on swallowing, an unpleasant taste 
in the mouth, bad breath, fatigue, and fever. They may be made 
worse by cold and damp, overusing the voice, smoking, food 
allergy , being run down, or emotional stress.
SELF-HELP Take garlic preparations. Drink plenty of ﬂuids. Gargle  
with a solution of calendula and hypericum  (see page 271) .
CAUTION If symptoms last for more than one week, or if loss of voice 
persists, see a doctor. If there is high fever, children should see a 
doctor within 12 hours, adults within 48 hours. If the tonsils ar e 
inﬂamed and accompanied by fever, see a doctor within 12 hours.• Thick, white catarrh in the second stage of a 
cold after the initial inﬂammation of mucous 
membranes has subsided
• Catarrh ﬂows down the nose or the back  
of the throat
• Watery catarrh may be so profuse that  
it is necessary to hold a handkerchief  
below the nose
• Loss of smell and taste
• Nose runs constantly with need to blow  
it all the time
• Catarrh is yellow or green, watery, burning, 
thick, and stringy
• Crusts and cracks inside the nostrils that 
make blowing the nose painful
• Nose may bleed
• Heightened sense of smell may make even the 
scent of ﬂowers unbearable
• Stringy, stretchy, greenish-yellow catarrh
• Nose feels blocked, with loss of smell
• Catarrh drips down the back of the throat
• Violent sneezing
• Pain above the eyes, in the right cheekbone, or 
on the right side of the face generally
• Yellow catarrh
• Nose feels blocked
• Facial bones are tender, even to the  
slightest touch
• Excessive yellow catarrh and sneezing
• Chilliness
• Throat looks red and feels dry, rough, 
constricted, burning, and tingly
• Extreme thirst, usually for warm drinks, but at 
infrequent intervals
• Skin is dry and hot
• Very painful throat with thick saliva and  
hoarse voice
• Possible cold sores or urticaria (hives)
• Desire for cold drinks
• Unpleasant taste in the mouth
• Pain on swallowing
• Body feels alternately hot and cold due to fever
• Exhaustion, weakness, and shakiness
• Head is heavy and feels as though it is boundThick, white catarrh
Catarrh resembling the 
white of a raw egg
Catarrh with constantly 
runny nose
Catarrh with extreme 
sensitivity to  
strong smells
Sinusitis with  
stringy catarrh
Sinusitis accompanied  
by tearfulness
Sinusitis with  
facial tenderness
Acute, painful sore throat
Raw, burning sore throat
Soreness extending to 
the neck and earsSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

   •227 RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
• Dogmatism
• Depression
• Desire to be left alone
• Dislike of sympathy
• Depression
• Irritability
• Poor memory
• Melancholia
• Tendency to weep while listening 
to music
• Timidity and indecisiveness
• Poor short-term memory
• Dogmatism
• Depression
• Self-pity and tearfulness
• Desire for sympathy and 
reassurance
• Irritability
• Emotional sensitivity
• Extreme anxiety, even to  
the extent of fearing death,  
due to sudden onset and  
severity of symptoms
• Tendency to quarrel
• Overcriticism of others
• Depression
• Irritability• For cold drinks 
• For massage
• For letting the hair down, literally
• For rest • In fresh air
• For perspiring
• For applying pressure to  
tender areas
• For applying pressure  
to the sinuses
• In dry weather
• For keeping the head warm
• For sleep
• For applying warm compresses to 
the sinuses
• On undressing when chilled
• For crying and sympathy
• With the hands above the head
• For gentle exercise and fresh air
• For cold drinks and applying cold 
compresses to the sinuses
• When sitting in warm 
surroundings
• When the head is wrapped up
• For movement
• For warmth
• In the open air if not too cold
• In fresh air
• For exercise
• For stimulants
• For warmth around the throat
• When bending forward
• In fresh air
• For drinking alcohol
• For perspiring• In fresh air
• In cold air and drafts
• For fatty foods
• During menstruation
• In sun and heat
• Before menstruation
• In damp conditions
• For physical exertion
• After dinner
• For inhaling cold air
• For drug abuse
• For cold or sweet foods,  
or seafood
• During menstruation
• On the left side of the face
• For drinking beer
• In the morning
• In hot weather
• In stuffy rooms
• In sun, heat, and extremes  
of temperature
• For rich, fatty foods
• When lying on the painful side
• In drafts
• For touch
• On undressing when chilled
• In cold, windy weather
• In warm rooms
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• In the evening and at night
• For music
• At night
• In cold, damp weather
• For rest
• Early in the morning and late  
at night
• In sun, fog, and damp
• Before thunderstormsKali. mur.
(see page 150)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Nat. mur.  
(see page 92)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Hydrastis
(see page 147)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Graphites
(see page 83)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Kali. bich.
(see page 87)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 2 days
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 2 days
Hepar sulph.
(see page 84)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 2 days
Aconite
(see page 32)  
30c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Dulcamara
(see page 62)  
6c every 12 hours 
up to 10 doses
Gelsemium
(see page 144)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 10 dosesPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

228 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
LARYNGITIS
Laryngitis is hoarseness or loss of voice caused by inﬂammation  
of the larynx as a result of an allergy or infection. It may also  
be caused by continuous coughing, breathing through the  
mouth rather than the nose, exposure to cold, dry , winds,  
inhaling toxic fumes, heavy smoking, drinking too much  
alcohol, or vomiting. If you are inherently susceptible to  
throat conditions  (see page 20) , a fright or emotional shock  
may cause inﬂammation. Laryngitis can also be triggered  
by overuse of the voice, and is an occupational hazard for  
teachers and singers.
SELF-HELP Do not smoke or drink alcohol, and avoid hot, smoky 
rooms. Rest the voice and increase your ﬂuid intake. Gargle  
with a solution of calendula and hypericum  (see page 271)   
every four hours. If you sing and loss of voice is a persistent 
problem, your voice may need retraining. Recurrent laryngitis  
may be the result of poor posture: the Alexander technique   
(see page 217)  may be helpful.
CAUTION If there is no improvement within a week to ten days,  
or if loss of voice persists, consult a doctor.
COUGHS
A cough is the body’s attempt to expel an irritant from the 
respiratory tract. The lungs build up a pressure of air that is 
released suddenly in an attempt to dislodge the cause of irritation. 
A cough either produces mucus or is dry . Irritation of the lining of 
the airway may be caused by catarrh dripping down the back of the 
throat, smoking, or atmospheric particles. Coughing can also be 
triggered by a shock or fright.
SELF-HELP Humidify all rooms. If you smoke, stop. Avoid dusty, smoky 
places and going out in cold, damp weather. Rest and drink a lot, 
especially hot water with fresh lemon juice and a little honey. If you 
are producing copious catarrh, avoid dairy products and starchy 
foods, which may increase mucus production. Try homeopathic  
or herbal over-the-counter cough mixtures.
CAUTION  If a cough is accompanied by breathing difﬁculties, fever,  
or chest pain, see a doctor. If it results from inhaling dust or fumes, 
and does not improve within two days, see a doctor.
BRONCHITIS
Bronchitis is inﬂammation of the bronchi—the airways connecting 
the windpipe to the lungs  (see page 180)— resulting in a cough  (see 
above)  that produces a lot of mucus. Other symptoms include fever, 
breathing difﬁculties, and wheezing. Bronchitis usually develops 
from a viral infection such as a cold or inﬂuenza, and is aggravated 
by atmospheric pollution, and by cold or damp air.
SELF-HELP  If you smoke, stop, and avoid smoky atmospheres. Try 
inhaling steam. If you have a bad attack, stay in bed for two or thr ee 
days with a hot-water bottle placed on your chest, and drink plenty of 
hot drinks. Avoid eating reﬁned carbohydrates.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist, see a doctor. If temperature rises 
above 102°F (39°C), if the mucus has blood in it, or if there are 
breathing difﬁculties, see a doctor within two hours.• Hoarseness or loss of voice
• Sudden onset of high temperature
• Larynx very sensitive to touch and inhaled air
• Throat feels dry and sore
• Talking may be painful
• Desire for cold drinks, which may be vomited 
when warmed in the stomach
• Copious mucus drips down the back of the 
throat and makes talking difﬁcult
• Cough may be violent enough to cause leakage 
of urine
• Loss of voice that is usually painful
• Dry, hollow-sounding, croaky cough
• Great thirst
• Possible rapid rise in temperature
• Bursting headache, aggravated by even the 
slightest cough, possibly with fever
• Extreme thirst, usually for warm drinks, but  
at infrequent intervals
• Whole body feels dehydrated
• Thick, green, bitter-tasting catarrh is coughed 
up, leaving an unpleasant taste in the mouth
• Poor appetite
• Tongue has a white coating
• Green, bland catarrh may issue from the nose
• Little or no thirst
• Sudden onset of symptoms
• Dry, staccato cough
• High fever
• Chilliness
• Tight, dry, tickly cough
• Frequent desire to drink ice water
• Pale, anxious appearance
• Dry, stabbing, painful cough
• Headache that is worse for coughing
• Chest pain that is relieved by supporting  
the elbows on the back of a chair
• Great thirstLaryngitis with high fever
Laryngitis with dry,  
tickly cough
Dry, raw throat and 
violent cough
Dry, irritating cough that 
comes on suddenly
Cough with chest pain
Cough with thick,  
green catarrh
 
Bronchitis that comes on 
suddenly after exposure 
to cold, dry air
Bronchitis with desire  
for ice water
Bronchitis with  
painful coughSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER•

•229 RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
• Anxiety, even to the extent  
of fearing death, due to sudden 
onset of symptoms
• Restlessness
• Strong desire for company  
and sympathy
• Irrational fears—for example,  
of darkness or thunderstorms
• Depression
• Extreme sensitivity to the 
suffering of others
• Extreme anxiety, even to the 
extent of fearing death
• Irritability
• Desire to be at home even  
if already there
• Reluctance to move or speak
• Stress about ﬁnancial problems
• Tearfulness
• Self-pity
• In young children, constant 
desire for cuddles
• Restlessness
• Anxiety, even to the extent  
of fearing death
• Anxiety and fear, especially 
during thunderstorms
• Excitability
• Great desire for reassurance
• Extreme irritability
• Desire to be left alone
• Delirium and desire to be  
at home even if already there• In fresh air
• For movement
• For warmth
• For sleep
• For massage
• In fresh air
• For drinking
• In warm, humid weather
• For cold drinks
• For gentle movement
• In fresh air
• For movement
• For warmth
• In cool conditions
• For applying ﬁrm, cool pressure  
to the head and chest
• In fresh air
• For a good cry
• For applying cold compresses  
to the chest
• In fresh air
• For rest
• For warm perspiration
• When lying on the right side
• For cold foods and drinks
• For massaging the chest
• When lying on the painful side
• For applying pressure to the chest
• For rest and quiet
• In cool, open air• In warm rooms
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• For music
• In the evening and at night
• For talking and laughing
• For hot foods and drinks
• When lying on the left or the 
painful side
• Between sunset and midnight
• In the morning
• For sweet foods
• For coffee
• In warm rooms
• On exposure to tobacco smoke 
or pollen
• In the evening and at night
• In cold, hot, or windy weather
• For movement and touch
• For bright light and noise
• For touch
• In the morning and at around  
9 p.m. and 3 a.m.
• In the evening
• In warm, stuffy rooms
• In cold, dry wind
• For shock
• At night
• For touch
• For warm foods
• In the evening
• In windy or cold weather
• During thunderstorms
• When sitting up or stooping
• For the least movement or touch
• For coughing, breathing, 
becoming hot, or eating
• For stressAconite
(see page 32)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Phosphorus
(see page 94)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 7 days
Causticum
(see page 79)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 7 days
Aconite
(see page 32)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Bryonia
(see page 42)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Aconite
(see page 32)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Phosphorus
(see page 94)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 2 days
Bryonia
(see page 42)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 2 daysPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

230 •
CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
The circulatory system transports blood around the body   
(see page 184) , supplying body tissues with oxygen and 
nutrients. Circulatory disorders may arise if the heart is not 
capable of pumping properly , or if blood flow is disrupted because arteries become clogged or less elastic, with the 
result that the heart has to work harder in order to circulate 
the blood. Arteries very often become less efficient with age. 
The circulation of blood is regulated by the autonomic HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
CHILBLAINS
Chilblains are most common on the hands and feet, and occur 
when superﬁcial blood vessels contract excessively because of an 
oversensitivity to cold. The skin becomes pale and numb, then red, 
swollen, and itchy . Eventually the skin may break.
SELF-HELP  Keep the hands and feet as warm and dry as possible, 
especially during cold, damp weather. Apply calendula ointment. Do 
not scratch the chilblains. Regular exercise will improve circulation, 
as will “windmilling” the arms.
CRAMPS
A cramp is an acute pain that occurs when muscles go into spasm 
as a result of a shortage of oxygen or a build-up of lactic acid. Poor 
circulation reduces oxygen supply to the muscles, and may occur 
after prolonged sitting or standing, lying awkwardly , if the arteries 
narrow suddenly on being chilled, during pregnancy , or because of 
salt deﬁciency after vomiting or excessive perspiration. A build-up 
of lactic acid occurs after strenuous or unaccustomed exercise.
SELF-HELP  If cramps are worse at night, raise the foot of your bed by 
about 4 in (10 cm). As cramps come on, stretch the muscles and 
massage them to increase the blood supply.
VARICOSE VEINS
When the valves inside the veins start to fail, blood pools form,  
a condition known as varicose veins. They show up as twisted, 
purple lines, mainly affecting the legs, and may be hereditary ,  
or the result of thrombosis (blood clot), obesity , or pregnancy .
SELF-HELP  Stand as little as possible and wear support tights.  
Sit with the feet raised above the level of the hips.
CAUTION  If the condition persists for three weeks, see a doctor.  
If a vein bursts and bleeds, bandage the leg tightly and keep it 
raised. See a doctor within two hours if the bleeding continues.
RESTLESS LEGS
This condition may be partly hereditary and partly nervous in 
origin, and is most common among the elderly and those who 
smoke, or if the leg muscles are overexerted and fatigued. It has 
been linked to diabetes, vitamin-B deﬁciency , excess caffeine, drug 
withdrawal, and food allergy . Symptoms are tickling, burning, or 
prickling sensations that are mainly in the lower legs and cause 
involuntary twitching or jerking.
SELF-HELP  Use a hot-water bottle in bed or wear warm socks. Cut out 
caffeine and eat plenty of fresh vegetables and fruits. Check for  
a food allergy if symptoms persist.• Skin in affected areas is red, prickly,  
and swollen
• Intolerable itching
• Burning pain in affected areas
• Burning, throbbing pain in affected areas
• Bluish inﬂammation
• Biting, itching sensation if affected areas  
are scratched
• Muscle twitching leading to violent muscle 
spasms in the toes, ankles, soles of the feet, 
and legs
• Ankles are painfully heavy
• Knees bend involuntarily when walking
• Pain resembling bruising brought on by 
overexertion
• Limbs feel as if they have been beaten
• Heaviness in limbs
• Veins are inﬂamed, possibly with burning 
feeling
• Veins are sore, swollen, and lumpy, and feel 
bruised and tender to the touch
• Veins may bleed
• Veins feel full
• Chilliness
• Veins smart and sting
• Tickling feeling, like ants moving around 
beneath the skin
• Burning, prickling sensations in the legs
• Legs feel wooden and dead
• Trembling, twitching feet and restless legs, 
even when asleep
• Restlessness that makes sleep difﬁcultBurning, itchy chilblains
Chilblains with swollen 
veins
Severe cramps in the 
legs or feet
Cramps from muscle 
fatigue
Varicose veins with sore, 
bruised feeling
Varicose veins that are 
worse when sitting with 
legs hanging down
Restless legs that are 
better for continuous 
movement
Feet that are restless 
even at nightSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•231 CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
• Great anxiety based on fear that 
chilblains are a harbinger of 
more serious disease
• Possible tearfulness due to 
discomfort of symptoms
• Desire for sympathy
• Tendency to shriek shrilly
• Violent tearfulness
• Fearfulness
• Fear of being touched
• Nervousness about pain
• Oversensitivity to noise
• Irritability
• Anxiety at night
• Lack of desire to work or study
• Timidity and submissiveness
• Tearfulness
• Desire for reassurance  
and consolation
• Mental restlessness
• Inability to concentrate
• Mental hyperactivity
• Intolerance of noise• For slow movement
• When warm in bed
• With the hands above the head
• For gentle exercise
• In cold, fresh air
• For applying ﬁrm pressure to the 
affected area
• For cold drinks
• For perspiring
• On starting to move
• In clear, cold weather
• When lying down
• For rest
• For lying down quietly
• In winter
• In cold, fresh air
• For applying cold compresses to 
the affected areas
• When standing upright
• When lying on the back
• For continuous movement
• For heat
• For holding the legs
• For movement
• For applying ﬁrm pressure to the 
affected area
• For massaging the legs• On exposure to cold and damp
• In cold weather
• Before thunderstorms
• For heat
• In extremes of temperature
• In the evening and at night
• For movement
• For applying light pressure to  
the affected area
• During sexual intercourse
• For heat
• For applying light pressure to the 
affected area
• For prolonged movement
• For injury
• For movement or jarring
• For applying pressure to the 
affected area
• In warm, humid weather
• For warmth
• In the evening
• During pregnancy
• For rest
• On starting to move
• In cold, damp weather
• For being exhausted
• For noise
• For touch
• For being overheatedAgaricus
(see page 33)   
6c half-hourly  
up to 6 doses
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)   
6c half-hourly 
up to 6 doses
Cuprum met.
(see page 80)  
6c 4 times daily  
up to 14 days
Arnica
(see page 37)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 14 days
Hamamelis
(see page 145)   
30c twice daily  
up to 7 days
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
30c twice daily 
up to 7 days
Rhus tox.
(see page 162)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 14 days
Zinc. met.
(see page 101)  
6c 4 times daily  
up to 14 daysnervous system  (see page 178) , and as such may be adversely 
affected by stress. As well as homeopathic self-help remedies 
for specific ailments, constitutional treatment  (see page 176)  
may improve the body’s general metabolic function, reduce 
stress, and maintain the health of other organs—for example, 
the liver—on which the functioning of the heart depends. Circulatory disorders, especially heart disease, benefit  
most from a complete health program that, as well as 
homeopathic treatment, includes key dietary practices, an 
adequate amount of appropriate exercise and relaxation,  
and a lifestyle that avoids smoking, stress, overwork, and 
excesses of any kind.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

232 •
THE MOUTH
Digestion begins in the mouth, where the digestive  
enzyme amylase, found in saliva, begins to break down 
carbohydrates. The teeth crush and chew food to break it up 
into smaller pieces, and the muscular tongue mixes it with lubricating saliva and rolls it into a ball ready for swallowing. 
When food enters the mouth, it stimulates taste buds on the 
tongue. These send signals along nerves to taste centers in 
the brain, which in turn activate digestive secretions. HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
TOOTHACHES
Often an indication of tooth decay , a toothache may also be a 
symptom of infection such as gum disease, an abscess (a pus-ﬁlled 
sac surrounding the root of a tooth), or sinusitis  (see page 226) .  
The pain may be sharp and shooting or dull and throbbing; it may 
be continuous, come in waves, or occur only when a decayed  
tooth comes into contact with sweet foods, or very hot or  
very cold foods.
SELF-HELP  Rub oil of cloves on the affected tooth and surrounding 
gums, except when taking a homeopathic remedy, in which case the 
oil may act as an antidote.
CAUTION  If a toothache is accompanied by fever and swelling of the 
gums or face, or if a tooth feels loose, see a dentist within 12 hours. 
If a tooth is sensitive to hot or cold, and to sweet foods and drinks, 
or if there is pain on biting, see a dentist within 48 hours.
GINGIVITIS
This condition causes the gums to bleed and become darker in 
color, swollen, and infected. Gingivitis usually occurs because  
of poor tooth-brushing, but it may be a side-effect of taking drugs, 
or be due to a vitamin deﬁciency , a serious blood disorder, or the 
immune system being weakened by stress.
SELF-HELP  Use a solution of calendula and hypericum  (see page 271)  
as a mouthwash.
CAUTION  If the condition does not improve after three days,  
see a dentist.
HALITOSIS
Halitosis, or bad breath, can be caused by tooth decay , smoking, 
gingivitis  (see above) , indigestion  (see page 234) , tonsillitis, sinusitis  
(see page 226) , or fasting. To test whether your breath smells, 
breathe into the cupped palms of your hands and inhale.
SELF-HELP  Avoid foods and drinks that leave a strong odor behind or 
cause indigestion. If you smoke, stop. Visit your dentist regularly and 
practice good oral hygiene.
MOUTH ULCERS
Mouth ulcers are inﬂamed spots that can occur anywhere inside 
the mouth, and result from careless tooth-brushing, biting the 
mouth, eating hot foods, allergy , being run down, or stress.
SELF-HELP  Avoid spicy, sweet, or acidic foods. If you smoke, stop. 
Rinse the mouth with a warm saline solution (1 tsp salt to  
¾ cup boiled, cooled water) several times a day.
CAUTION  If ulcers have not healed in three weeks, see a doctor.• Oversensitivity to agonizing pain that causes 
restlessness and thrashing around
• Pain makes sleeping difﬁcult
• Jerking, tearing pain
• Agonizing pain
• Swollen, red cheek on the same side of the 
face as a decayed tooth
• In young children, symptoms may be 
associated with teething
• Gums and cheeks are swollen and hot and 
painful to the touch
• Shooting pains extend to the ear
• Waves of pain that increase in severity to 
become excruciating before subsiding
• Gums are tender, spongy, and bleed easily
• Excessive production of saliva, which dribbles 
on to the pillow during sleep
• Teeth may feel loose
• Taste of pus in the mouth
• Teeth are very sensitive to heat and cold
• Possible mouth ulcers or cold sores with 
cracks at the corner of the mouth
• Breath and sweat smell offensive
• Excessive production of saliva, which dribbles 
on to the pillow during sleep
• Tongue is yellow and thickly coated
• Mouth feels dry
• Smarting, burning soreness in ulcerated areas
• Metallic or bitter taste in the mouth
• Tongue is clean, dry, and redToothache with severe, 
shooting pain
Toothache with 
unbearable pain
Toothache with  
throbbing pain
Bleeding gums with 
halitosis
Swollen, bleeding gums 
with ulcers
Halitosis associated with 
tooth decay and gingivitis
Burning mouth ulcersSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•233 THE MOUTH
• Oversensitivity to pain
• Inability to relax
• Hyperactive mind
• Irritability
• Irascibility
• Desire to be left alone and not 
be bothered by anything
• Possible violent outbursts, if 
the condition is severe and 
accompanied by fever
• Mental dullness
• Hesitant speech
• Slow comprehension
• Lack of willpower or motivation
• Desire to be left alone
• Aversion to sympathy  
and consolation
• Desire to be left alone
• Aversion to sympathy  
and consolation
• Restlessness
• Restlessness
• Anxiety• For ice-cold water in the mouth
• For lying down
• For sleep
• For sympathy
• In young children, for being 
carried around
• For cold applications, such as ice 
on the tooth
• For rest
• For leaning the head  
against something
• For bending backward
• For rest
• When warmly dressed
• In the morning
• In fresh air
• For fasting
• For rubbing the affected area
• For rest
• When warmly dressed
• For rubbing the gums
• For a warm mouthwash
• For applying warm compresses  
to the face
• When lying with the head higher 
than the body• For heat
• For hot foods
• For noise
• At night
• For being angry
• For warm foods and drinks
• In cold air
• For touch
• For jarring
• At night
• In fresh air
• In extremes of temperature
• For perspiring at night
• For stress
• In drafts
• For physical or mental exertion
• For emotional stress
• For warmth
• In hot sun
• For noise or jarring
• For cold and extremes of 
temperature
• For perspiring at night
• For stress
• For cold foods and drinks
• In cold, dry, windy weather
• Between midnight and 2 a.m.
• For stress
• For being run downCoffea
(see page 50)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 14 days
Chamomilla
(see page 46)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 14 days
Belladonna
(see page 39)   
30c every 5 minutes  
up to 10 doses
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)   
6c every 4 hours  
up to 3 days
Nat. mur.
(see page 92)   
6c every 4 hours  
up to 3 days
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)   
6c 3 times daily  
up to 7 days
Arsen. alb.
(see page 68)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 5 daysBacteria naturally present in the mouth feed on sugary food 
particles and combine with saliva to form plaque—a sticky 
coating on the teeth and gums. If unchecked, plaque 
eventually erodes tooth enamel. Problems with teeth and 
gums are common in developed countries, where the diet is 
rich in sugar. Many mouth problems can be prevented by regular dental checkups, good oral hygiene, and a diet that 
includes fibrous, chewy , non-sugary foods that stimulate the 
production of saliva, which contains infection-fighting white 
blood cells. Homeopathic treatment includes soothing 
mouthwashes as well as standard remedies that depend on 
specific symptoms.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

234 •
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
Digestion is a complex process that starts with the chewing 
of food in the mouth and ends with the passing of waste 
from the rectum  (see page 188) . A healthy , efficient digestive 
system is essential for both physical and mental well-being, but it can be upset by many factors. Some can be controlled, 
such as diet and, to a certain extent, emotional stress or 
allergy , and some cannot, like infection or inherited 
problems. Dietary discretion—what a person chooses to eat—HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
INDIGESTION
Indigestion is a blanket term for a number of symptoms that 
include excessive burping, stomachaches, and heartburn  (see 
below) . It may be caused by the defective production or ﬂow of 
digestive enzymes, ﬂuids, or hormones, or by something more 
serious such as a peptic ulcer. Alternatively , it may result simply 
from eating too much, or eating the kinds of food that the 
digestive system ﬁnds difﬁcult to process. Indigestion tends  
to worsen with stress and with age.
SELF-HELP  Practice some form of relaxation or meditation before you 
eat. Do not rush your food, and relax for at least 30 minutes after 
eating. Avoid coffee, tea, alcohol, carbonated drinks, smoking, and 
eating late at night. Avoid foods that may cause problems, such as 
citrus fruits, tomatoes, onions, beans, nuts, spices, bread, pork, and 
rich, fatty foods. Cut down on unreﬁned carbohydrates.
CAUTION  If you experience serious pain radiating toward the back, 
with or without vomiting, see a doctor within two hours. If you vomit 
blood, consult a doctor immediately.
HEARTBURN
Heartburn is a common form of indigestion consisting of a burning 
pain in the stomach or the esophagus and the chest. It tends  
to worsen with age, and may be associated with a hiatus hernia 
(protrusion of the stomach through the opening in the diaphragm  
into the esophagus). It is exacerbated by stress, and by eating certain 
foods  (see Indigestion , above) . Eating too quickly , or eating too much, 
and swallowing air also aggravate the condition. Heartburn is very 
common during pregnancy , when digestive efﬁciency is impaired.
SELF-HELP  Try relaxation or meditation before you eat. Eat calmly,  
and relax for 30 minutes afterward. Avoid eating late, and do  
not eat foods that you know upset you. If you smoke, stop. Raise  
the head of your bed slightly.
CAUTION  If you have serious pain radiating toward the back, see a doctor 
within two hours. If you vomit blood, consult a doctor immediately.
HICCUPS
Hiccups are caused by spasms of the diaphragm that produce a rush  
of air into the lungs. This causes the vocal cords to snap shut with a 
click. The spasms are caused by irritation of the diaphragm due to too 
much air in the stomach, laughing, being tickled, or emotional stress.
SELF-HELP  Traditional cures include holding the breath, breathing 
rapidly, breathing into a paper bag, having someone give you a shock, 
or squirting lemon juice down the back of the throat. Water with a 
little glucose may help infants.• Digestion seems to have slowed down
• Pain when eating even the plainest food
• Burning feeling in the stomach extending 
through to the back
• Craving for salty, acidic, or sweet foods and 
coffee, and aversion to meat or milk
• Heartburn 30 minutes after eating, with  
a putrid taste in the mouth
• Craving for fatty, acidic, or spicy foods and 
alcohol, even though they upset the digestion
• Indigestion two hours after eating, and 
especially in the evening
• Pounding heart
• Unpleasant taste in the mouth
• Feeling of pressure under the breastbone
• Possible headache around the eyes
• Burning sensation in the chest
• Craving for ice-cold water that may be vomited 
as soon as it is warmed in the stomach
• Constant hunger
• Wakefulness and night hunger but eating 
produces no weight gain
• Desire for salt, ice cream, chocolate, ﬁsh,  
and cool drinks, and aversion to oysters, eggs, 
and meat
• Burning sensation associated with hunger and 
weakness due to low blood-sugar  
levels (hypoglycemia)
• Strong craving for sweet, spicy, and fatty foods
• Hiccups an hour or two after eating a very  
rich meal
• Possible retching
• Hiccups after eating, drinking, or smokingIndigestion with 
excessive ﬂatulence
Indigestion with painful 
retching
Indigestion with nausea 
and/or vomiting
Heartburn with desire for 
ice-cold water
Heartburn with craving  
for sweets
Hiccups with belching
Hiccups associated with 
emotional stressSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•235 DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
• Lack of mental energy
• Lack of interest in life
• Intransigence
• Irritability
• Agitation resulting from  
stress and lack of sleep
• Criticism of others
• Tearfulness at the  
slightest provocation
• Depression
• Self-pity
• Desire for sympathy
• Anxiety about health
• Irrational fear of the dark,  
being alone, death, and 
thunderstorms
• Laziness and lack of  
mental energy
• Melancholia • Hypochondria
• Tendency to daydream
• Indecision
• Irritability
• Fussiness
• Lack of mental energy
• Exhaustion from lack of sleep
• Overcriticism
• Moodiness • Oversensitivity
• Lack of mental energy
• Guilt • Sensitivity to noise• For burping
• In cold, fresh air
• For warmth
• For sleep
• For applying ﬁrm pressure to  
the stomach
• In the evening
• For being alone
• For gentle exercise
• For crying
• For cold foods and water
• For sleep
• For general body massage
• In the open air
• For applying warm compresses  
to the stomach and lower chest
• For warm drinks
• For hot drinks
• For loosening clothing
• For swallowing
• For eating
• For lying on the back• For overeating
• For rich, fatty foods
• For eating too late in the day
• When lying down
• In the evening
• In warm, wet weather
• For touch
• For fatty, acidic, or spicy foods  
or alcohol
• For stress
• For lack of sleep
• In cold, windy weather
• For rich, fatty foods
• For emotional stress
• For hormonal changes associated 
with menstruation or pregnancy
• In the evening and at night
• In hot, stuffy conditions
• When lying on the back
• For stress
• For warm foods
• For bathing
• For becoming overheated, 
especially in a warm room or  
in bed at night
• When standing up
• For the pressure of clothing
• For overindulgence
• For food, drink, or drugs
• For emotional stress
• For smoking, eating, or drinking 
when upsetCarbo veg.
(see page 44)  30c  
every 10–15 minutes  
up to 7 doses
Nux vomica
(see page 63)   
6c every 10–15 minutes  
up to 7 doses
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)   
6c every 10–15 minutes 
up to 7 doses
Phosphorus
(see page 94)   
6c every 10–15 minutes  
up to 7 doses if acute
Sulphur
(see page 99)   
6c every 10–15 minutes  
up to 7 doses if acute
Nux vomica
(see page 63)   
6c every 15 minutes  
up to 6 doses
Ignatia
(see page 57)  6c every 15 minutes 
up to 6 dosesand eating habits have an obvious impact on digestion. Some 
foods are difficult to digest, and routines such as eating late 
may also cause problems. Minor ailments, such as 
indigestion, lend themselves to homeopathic self-help, 
especially if combined with dietary controls. Homeopathic 
remedies are concerned with improving the condition of the digestive tract, by adjusting the number of beneficial 
bacteria; reducing irritation caused by some foods; 
improving waste elimination; and maintaining other organs 
involved in the digestive process, such as the liver. Some 
ailments, such as hemorrhoids, may need constitutional 
treatment  (see page 176) , especially if they recur.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

236 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
NAUSEA & VOMITING
Nausea, or the feeling of a need to vomit, is not necessarily 
followed by vomiting, the involuntary expulsion of the contents  
of the stomach, but the causes of the two are the same. Nausea  
and vomiting may be symptoms of digestive disorders caused by 
eating fatty foods, drinking too much alcohol, food poisoning, or 
infections such as gastroenteritis  (see below) . Stress, migraine, or  
the hormonal changes associated with menstruation or pregnancy   
(see page 262)  may also trigger these conditions. Nausea and 
vomiting may also indicate more serious ailments, many of which 
are digestive disorders, such as a peptic ulcer (erosion of areas of 
the digestive tract by acidic gastric juices) or cancer of the stomach, 
but some of which are connected to the brain and nervous system. 
Self-help treatments are not appropriate in these cases.
SELF-HELP  Drink small amounts of cooled, boiled water frequently  
and avoid solid foods. If you smoke, stop.
CAUTION  If vomiting persists for more than 48 hours, or is 
accompanied by fever, see a doctor within two hours. If there is 
severe abdominal pain or blood in the vomit, seek medical help 
immediately. If you think you may have vomited prescribed drugs, 
consult a doctor.
GASTROENTERITIS (GASTRIC FLU)
This inﬂammation of the digestive tract is usually caused by a virus 
transmitted directly from person to person or via contaminated 
food and water. Symptoms of gastroenteritis vary in severity but 
usually pass within 48 hours. At worst, there is nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever, and exhaustion. Infants and the 
elderly are most at risk because of the danger of dehydration.
SELF-HELP  Rest and drink plenty of ﬂuids, preferably salted, cooled, 
boiled water (1 tsp salt and 8 tsp sugar to approximately 1 quart/
liter of water), to prevent dehydration. Avoid drinking milk and eating 
any solid food until the stomach settles. Be meticulous about 
personal hygiene.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist for more than 48 hours, or if there  
is blood in the feces or a fever, see a doctor within two hours.  
If symptoms are accompanied by severe abdominal pain that  
lasts for more than an hour, consult a doctor immediately.
BLOATING & FLATULENCE
Bloating and ﬂatulence—a feeling of fullness in the stomach 
associated with burping or the passing of air out through the anus— 
may be due to constipation  (see page 238)  or intestinal dysbios  
(an overgrowth of bacteria or fungi in the intestine). The condition 
may be worse prior to menstruation, and is aggravated by anxiety , 
food intolerance, or swallowing air.
SELF-HELP  Avoid eating legumes, onions, cabbage, and nuts, and  
use cumin, aniseed, or ginger in your cooking.• Constant nausea with salivation that is not 
relieved by vomiting
• Vomit may include green mucus
• Possible headaches, perspiration,  
and diarrhea
• Spasmodic abdominal pain
• Clean tongue
• Craving for ice-cold drinks, which are then 
vomited when warmed in the stomach
• Burning pain in the pit of the stomach with 
retching and vomiting
• Nausea and vomiting may be accompanied by 
catarrh dripping down the back of the throat
• Vomiting two to three hours after eating
• Painful retching
• Sensation resembling a hangover
• Tendency to wake up at around 4 a.m.  
for a couple of hours
• Vomiting with burning pain in the abdomen
• Diarrhea that causes soreness of the anus 
and stinging in the rectum
• Craving for cold drinks that may be vomited as 
soon as they are warmed in the stomach
• Chilliness
• Colicky pains that are better when the body  
is bent double
• Possible diarrhea
• Pain relieved by passing gas
• Rumbling, gurgling stomach
• Pressure under the breastbone after meals
• No two stools are alike in texture or color
• Possible vomiting
• Hunger, but bloated feeling after only small 
amounts of food have been eaten
• Difﬁculty in passing stools without straining
• Main discomfort is on the right side of  
the abdomen, and is not relieved by  
passing wind
• All foods produce ﬂatulence
• Burning sensation in the stomach
• Craving for salty, acidic, and sweet foods and 
coffee, and aversion to meat and milkConstant nausea
Vomiting with great thirst
Nausea and vomiting  
with tearfulness
Nausea and vomiting  
with irritability
Vomiting and diarrhea  
at the same time
Gastroenteritis with 
severe abdominal cramp
Gastroenteritis with 
different types of stool
Bloating after eating only 
small amounts of food
Bloating and ﬂatulence 
relieved by burpingSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•237 DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
• None marked, but possible 
tendency to be very hard  
to please
• Fear and anxiety
• Great concern for others or 
complete indifference, even 
toward loved ones
• Tearfulness
• Self-pity
• Great need for sympathy
• Depression
• Irritability
• Overcriticism of others
• Overactive brain when awake 
during the night
• Restlessness, fear, and anxiety
• Despair of recovery
• Irritability
• Irritability and extreme sensitivity
• Possible suppressed anger and 
indignation at real or imagined ill 
treatment
• Depression and self-pity
• Tearfulness and great desire for 
sympathy and consolation
• Melancholia
• Apprehension
• Poor memory
• Lethargy, sluggishness,  
and indifference
• Irritability with mood swings• In the open air
• For rest
• For sleep
• For massage and relaxation
• When lying on the right side
• For crying and sympathy
• For gentle exercise
• In fresh air
• For cold drinks
• With the hands above the head
• For warmth
• For sleep
• For applying ﬁrm pressure to  
the abdomen
• For warmth
• For hot drinks
• When lying on one side with the 
knees pulled up to the chest
• For warmth
• For sleep
• For coffee
• For crying and sympathy
• In fresh air
• For cold drinks
• For hot foods and drinks
• After midnight
• In cool conditions
• For burping
• In fresh air
• For cold• In a moving car or when looking at 
moving objects
• For movement
• When lying down
• For smelling food
• For physical or mental exertion
• For hot foods and drinks
• Between sunset and midnight
• When the hands are in cold water
• For rich, fatty foods
• In hot, stuffy rooms
• In the sun
• In the evening and at night
• For overindulgence
• For cold
• For noise
• For stress
• At the sight and smell of food
• Between midnight and 2 a.m.
• For cold drinks
• For alcohol
• For eating or drinking
• In cold, damp weather
• At around 4 p.m.
• In hot, stuffy rooms
• In the evening and at night
• For rich, fatty foods
• For stress
• For wearing tight clothing
• For overeating
• Between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
• In stuffy rooms
• For overeating
• For rich, fatty foods
• For eating too late in the day
• In the evening
• For lying downIpecac.
(see page 45)   
6c hourly up to 10 doses (mild);  
6c every 15 minutes  
up to 10 doses (acute)
Phosphorus
(see page 94)  6c hourly up to 10 
doses (mild); 6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses (acute)
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  6c hourly up to 10 
doses (mild); 6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses (acute)
Nux vomica
(see page 63)   
6c every 15 minutes  
up to 10 doses
Arsen. alb.
(see page 68)   
6c hourly up to  
10 doses
Colocynthis
(see page 52)   
6c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
6c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Lycopodium
(see page 59)   
6c half-hourly  
up to 10 doses
Carbo veg.
(see page 44)   
6c half-hourly  
up to 10 dosesPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

238 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
DIARRHEA
Diarrhea is the frequent passing of watery or loose stools as  
a result of the failure of the large intestine to absorb water from 
undigested material. This may be the result of dietary or digestive 
problems, such as eating too many prunes or legumes, a lack of 
vitamin B or folic acid, too much vitamin D, food intolerance, 
parasites, or gastroenteritis  (see page 236) . Diarrhea may indicate  
a more serious condition, such as irritable bowel syndrome   
(see page 189) , or be a reaction to certain drugs, anxiety , or stress.
SELF-HELP  Drink plenty of boiled, cooled water with a little honey  
in it or ice water to avoid dehydration. Progress to arrowroot, tapioca, 
semolina, or slippery elm food, then thin soups. A supplement of 
acidophilus, or eating live yogurt, is advisable if diarrhea follows 
taking certain drugs such as antibiotics. Avoid analgesics and 
vitamin E supplements.
CAUTION  If diarrhea continues for more than 48 hours, or if there  
is blood in the feces, see a doctor within two hours. Recurrent 
diarrhea may require constitutional homeopathic treatment   
(see page 176) .
CONSTIPATION
Constipation is the difﬁcult and/or infrequent passing of stools.  
It is commonly caused by a diet that includes too little ﬁber, but it 
can also result from a lack of exercise, stress, poor bowel training, 
taking certain drugs, and thyroid or liver problems. Chronic 
constipation may be due to the recurrent use of laxatives or 
drinking too much coffee or alcohol, and is viewed in homeopathy 
as a constitutional problem  (see page 176) .
SELF-HELP  Try eating plenty of raw vegetables before resorting to 
laxatives based on substances such as senna which, over a long 
period, may irritate the lining of the gut. Increase the amount of 
exercise you do and amount of ﬂuid you drink.
CAUTION  If a marked change in bowel function is accompanied by a 
weight loss of more than 1 lb (0.5 kg) in a week, see a doctor within 
48 hours. If there is any bleeding from the anus or blood in the 
stools, see a doctor within 12 hours. If no stools have been passed 
for several days despite self-help measures, especially if there is 
pain in the abdomen, see a doctor as soon as possible.
HEMORRHOIDS
Hemorrhoids, or piles, are swollen veins in the lower rectum and 
around the anus, often due to constipation  (see above) , but also 
associated with hormonal problems, pregnancy , childbirth, the 
overuse of laxatives, and sitting on hard surfaces.
SELF-HELP  Try peony ointment or hamamelis suppositories. Include 
more ﬁber in your diet to avoid constipation.
CAUTION  If there is bleeding from the anus, do not assume that  
it is due to piles until other possible causes have been ruled out.  
If bleeding persists, see a doctor within 12 hours.• Yellowish-green stools accompanied by  
severe ﬂatulence
• Painful urination
• Tip of the tongue is red
• Diarrhea followed by severe ﬂatulence
• Stools may be greenish in color
• Flatulence not relieved by burping
• Craving for salty, sweet, and cold foods
• Green, watery diarrhea resembling  
chopped spinach
• Possible nausea and perspiration
• Possible colicky pains or lack of pain
• Stools are scanty, odorless, and brown
• Stools burn the skin around the anus
• Stools are large, dry, hard, and burned-looking
• Headache and congested feeling
• Bloated abdomen
• Burning in the rectum after passing a stool
• Great thirst
• All mucous membranes are dry
• Cramps and spasms in the anus resulting in  
a great urgency to pass a stool, but with 
increasing difﬁculty in doing so
• Great thirst
• No desire to open the bowels until the rectum 
is completely distended
• Difﬁculty in passing stools
• Stools may be soft and claylike or covered  
in mucus
• Sensation as though a stool has been coughed 
up and caught beneath the left rib cage
• Itchy inﬂammation of the veins
• Sore, bruised feeling in the anus
• Hemorrhoids may bleed
• Hemorrhoids feel strained and rigid
• Great thirst
• Internal hemorrhoids associated  
with constipation
• Dry, splinterlike sensation in the rectum
• Lumpy stools that cause stitching pain
• Hot, dry, itchy anusDiarrhea caused by  
food intolerance
Diarrhea caused by 
nervous excitement
Diarrhea after shock
Diarrhea after cold foods 
and drinks
Dry, hard stools and dry 
mucous membranes
Constipation with strong 
urge to pass stools
Constipation with 
difﬁculty in passing even 
soft stools
Hemorrhoids resembling 
a bunch of grapes
Internal hemorrhoids with 
splinterlike painSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•239 DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
• Irritability due to discomfort  
of symptoms
• Anxiety about whether gas or 
stools will be passed
• Apprehension
• Great fear of death, even to  
the extent of predicting the time 
of death
• Fear, particularly of having an 
incurable illness
• Restlessness
• Wakefulness between midnight 
and about 2 a.m.
• Irritability
• Anger and irritability
• Extreme sensitivity to noise, 
touch, and pressure
• Sense of urgency internally 
despite outward appearance  
of slowing down
• Feeling of foreboding
• Possible confusion
• Possible sense of unreality
• None apart from irritability due 
to discomfort of symptoms
• Depression
• Irritability
• Difﬁculty in concentrating
• Confusion upon waking• For cold
• In fresh air
• For fasting
• In fresh air
• For cold
• For passing stools
• For frequent, small sips of  
warm drinks
• For applying pressure to the head 
and abdomen
• For cold
• For being left alone and  
keeping quiet
• For heat
• For sleep
• In the evening
• For stretching the body backward
• For standing up
• For rest
• If the hemorrhoids bleed
• For kneeling
• In cool, open air• In hot weather
• After eating or drinking
• Early in the morning
• For warmth
• For sweet foods
• At night
• On exposure to cold wind
• For overeating in summer
• For cold drinks, ice cream or 
freezer pops, and overripe fruits
• For overeating
• For rich, fatty foods
• For eating too late in the day
• For too much mental stimulation
• For touch and pressure
• For noise
• Early in the morning
• In cold weather
• For wine, vinegar, pepper, salt, 
and starchy foods
• For warmth
• For pressure on the affected area
• For movement
• In the morning
• For passing a stool
• For standingAloe
(see page 35)   
6c hourly up to  
10 doses
Argentum nit.
(see page 74)   
6c half-hourly  
up to 10 doses
Aconite
(see page 32)   
30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses
Arsen. alb.
(see page 68)   
6c half-hourly up  
to 10 doses
Bryonia
(see page 42)   
30c every 2 hours  
up to 10 doses
Nux vomica
(see page 63)   
6c every 2 hours  
up to 10 doses
Alumina
(see page 72)  
6c every 2 hours  
up to 10 doses
Hamamelis
(see page 145)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 5 days
Aesculus
(see page 121)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 5 daysPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

240 •
THE SKIN
The skin accounts for 16 percent of the total weight of the 
human body and as such may be described as its largest 
organ. Stretched out flat, it would cover 15–20 square feet 
(2–2.6 square meters). It protects the internal organs of the body from environmental impact and injury , and acts as a 
sensory organ, regulating body temperature and metabolism— 
for example, the control of bodily fluids and elimination of 
waste. The skin contains blood vessels, lymph vessels, and HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
MILD ACNE
The term acne includes common blemishes such as blackheads 
(comedones), whiteheads (milia), and yellowheads (pustules). Acne 
is associated with high hormone levels—for example, at puberty—
that increase production of sebum, the skin’s oily secretion, leading 
to clogged pores. If pores become infected, pimples form. Acne may 
be exacerbated by taking certain drugs or by stress. If there is a ﬁrm 
swelling beneath the skin, treat as for boils  (see below) .
SELF-HELP  Sunlight in moderation and fresh air are beneﬁcial. Avoid 
reﬁned carbohydrates, chocolate, cheese, nuts, carbonated citrus 
drinks, and processed foods. Wash affected areas thoroughly twice a 
day. Do not scrub the skin, since this spreads infection, or pick 
pimples and risk scarring. Use commercial preparations sparingly.
CAUTION  If there is scarring or large, ﬂuid-ﬁlled pimples (cysts), treat  
as for rosacea  (see page 193) . If pimples persist for 14 days, or are 
causing distress, see a doctor.
MILD ECZEMA
Mild eczema is common, especially in children. The skin is 
inﬂamed and itchy , possibly with small pimples and scaly patches.  
If scratched, the skin may bleed. Eczema is commonly found in  
the ﬂexures, such as the bend of an elbow, and on the face, but  
it can occur anywhere. It may be an allergic reaction to a variety  
of chemical irritants, plants, food, or metals, or it may be 
hereditary . Eczema may be exacerbated by stress, hormonal 
changes, or dietary factors.
SELF-HELP  Avoid known irritants. Use moisturizing ointments, 
preferably parafﬁn-based, to keep the skin soft. Use emulsifying 
ointments for washing rather than soap. Wear cotton next to the  
skin. Avoid potentially irritating foods, such as dairy products,  
one at a time for a month, and see if the condition improves.
CAUTION  If the skin produces a watery discharge, or becomes 
infected, creating a yellow discharge, or if irritation causes 
sleeplessness, treat as for severe eczema  (see page 194) .
BOILS
A boil is a ﬁrm swelling (nodule) beneath the skin caused by the 
infection of a hair follicle. Thick, white or yellow pus accumulates 
and comes to a head. Boils may be associated with illness, being 
run-down, fatigue, or stress. Recurrent boils may be due to an 
infection or they may be a symptom of diabetes.
SELF-HELP  Bathe a boil with a solution of hypericum and calendula  
(see page 271) . Never squeeze a boil, and if it bursts, let it drain 
naturally. Avoid handling food after dealing with boils.
CAUTION  If boils recur, are accompanied by fever or severe pain,  
or do not heal within a week, consult a doctor.• Itchy pimples including blackheads and 
yellowheads with depressed centers
• Tendency for scarring if the pimples  
are scratched
• Fidgety feet and hands
• Yellowheads that are extremely painful  
to the touch
• Pimples occur during puberty
• Associated with delayed or scanty 
menstruation in adolescent girls
• Pimples are worse for eating rich, fatty foods
• Skin is dry and burning, but is aggravated by 
the application of cold compresses
• Inability to sit still
• Sleeplessness, especially after midnight
• Skin is rough, red, and itchy
• Possible diarrhea, especially early  
in the morning
• Desire for salty, fatty, spicy, or sweet foods
• Skin is rough, dry, and may be cracked
• Eruptions are worst behind the ears and 
possibly on the palms of the hands
• Face feels dry, as if covered by a cobweb
• Possible sudden onset of symptoms
• Boil is round and hard
• Skin around the boil is dry, inﬂamed, painful, 
and throbbing
• Possible fever
• Boil has a head of pus that is on the  
point of bursting
• Boil is sensitive to the slightest touchItchy pimples on the face 
and shoulders
Painful, pus-ﬁlled pimples
Acne associated with 
hormonal imbalance, 
especially in  
adolescent girls
Eczema with restlessness
Dry eczema
Eczema that is worst 
behind the ears
Early stages of  
boil formation
Later stages of boil when 
pus has formedSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•241 THE SKIN
• Restlessness
• Nervousness
• Suspicion
• Feeling of helplessness
• Great irritability
• Petulance
• Tendency to lash out if the 
pimples are touched
• Tearfulness
• Self-pity
• Desire for sympathy
• Possible anxiety
• Restlessness
• Desire for reassurance
• Anxiety
• Lack of mental energy
• Overcriticism of others but 
tolerance of one’s own failings
• Timidity
• Indecisiveness
• Possible anxiety and depression
• Emotionalism
• None, unless multiple boils  
are accompanied by fever, 
in which case there may be 
delirium and hallucinations
• Possible extreme bad temper
• Desire not to be touched, 
physically or emotionally• For physical or mental exertion
• In cold weather
• For heat
• In damp weather
• For eating
• For crying
• In the open air
• For applying cold compresses to 
the affected areas
• For warmth
• For applying warm compresses  
to the affected areas
• For walking around
• In fresh air
• For cold
• For perspiring
• For sleep
• When wrapped up warmly
• In fresh air
• For applying pressure to the 
affected area
• At night
• For warmth
• For warmth
• For applying warm compresses  
to the affected area
• In damp weather• For hormonal changes such as 
those associated with puberty  
or menstruation
• For emotional stress
• When the pimples are touched, 
even lightly
• For cold
• When lying on the affected areas
• For rich, fatty foods
• In warm, stuffy rooms
• For hormonal changes such as 
those associated with puberty, 
menstruation, or pregnancy
• For cold
• Between midnight and 2 a.m.
• For physical or mental exertion
• For drinking milk
• For washing
• For becoming overheated
• Early in the morning
• For cold or sweet foods,  
or seafood
• For hormonal changes associated 
with menstruation
• In cold conditions
• For scratching the skin
• For applying cold compresses  
to the affected area
• In drafts
• For touch
• In cold air and drafts
• For even the lightest touch
• When lying on the affected areaKali. brom.
(see page 149)   
6c 3 times daily  
up to 14 days
Hepar sulph.
(see page 84)   
6c 3 times daily  
up to 14 days
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)   
6c 3 times daily  
up to 14 days
Arsen. alb.
(see page 68)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 7 days
Sulphur
(see page 99)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 7 days
Graphites
(see page 83)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 7 days
Belladonna
(see page 39)   
30c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Hepar sulph. 
(see page 84)   
6c hourly 
up to 10 dosesnerve endings that perform its sensory function, glands  
that manufacture sebum to keep the skin supple and 
waterproof, and follicles that produce hair and nails. 
Homeopathic practitioners tend to regard skin complaints as 
an outer manifestation of what is going on within the body , 
and look for underlying causes of skin eruptions. Stress, poor diet, and allergies, as well as infections, may all cause 
outbreaks. Skin conditions may be aggravated by factors 
such as lack of exercise; eating sugary foods, refined 
carbohydrates, or other foods; caffeine and alcohol; 
constipation; the use of cosmetics; and contact irritants 
in the environment.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

242 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
URTICARIA (HIVES)
This condition consists of raised red patches—sometimes with 
paler centers—that itch intensely . It may be caused by food allergy , 
certain drugs, bites or stings, or heat, cold, or sunlight. Urticaria 
may also be a symptom of stress or leaky gut syndrome  (see Allergy , 
page 206) .
SELF-HELP  Take a cool shower or place a covered ice-pack on the 
affected area. Urtica ointment may relieve itchiness.
CAUTION  If the eyes, lips, or throat swell dramatically, call 911 ,  
and take Apis 30c  every minute until help arrives.
COLD SORES
Cold sores are blisters on and around the mouth caused by a virus. 
They are triggered by being run-down or by hot, cold, or windy 
weather. Accompanying symptoms include ulcers, inﬂamed gums, 
a furry tongue, and mild fever.
SELF-HELP  Avoid eating peanuts, chocolate, seeds, and cereals.
WARTS
A wart is caused by a virus that causes cells to multiply rapidly , 
forming a raised lump. Warts on the feet (verrucas) tend to grow 
inward as a result of the pressure placed on them.
SELF-HELP  Cover a wart, but not the surrounding skin, with a fabric 
adhesive bandage. Drip thuja mother tincture on to it twice daily. 
Over-the-counter treatments can be used with homeopathic ones, 
except on facial warts. Keep treatments away from the eyes.
CAUTION  If the condition does not improve, and especially if a wart 
changes size or color, or if it itches or bleeds, consult a doctor.
DANDRUFF
Dandruff is characterized by a ﬂaking scalp, which is sometimes 
itchy and red. It may be caused by seborrheic dermatitis, a form of 
eczema  (see page 240) . More rarely , it may be symptomatic  
of psoriasis  (see page 195)  or a fungal infection.
SELF-HELP  Reduce your intake of reﬁned carbohydrates and animal 
fats. If the whole scalp itches, place a cold compress soaked in  
olive oil on the head overnight; wash off with a pure soap shampoo.  
If all else fails, use a shampoo containing selenium, but follow 
instructions carefully. Apply calendula ointment to itchy areas around 
the hair line.
HAIR LOSS
Old hair is lost as new hair grows. Growth may slow sometimes  
so that hair is lost faster than it is replaced. Thinning often occurs 
with age, especially in men, and may be hereditary . Hair loss may 
be associated with thyroid problems, anemia, vitamin or mineral 
deﬁciency , stress or shock, or certain drugs.
SELF-HELP  Avoid processes such as dyeing or perming, and do not 
wash or condition the hair too frequently. Let the hair dry naturally. 
Scalp massage may help. Eat plenty of protein.
CAUTION  If the condition does not improve, or if there is no 
explanation for sudden hair loss, consult a doctor.• Skin on the lips and eyelids is red, swollen, 
and burning
• Throat may be swollen
• Burning sensation, especially on the hands
• Itchy, red or pale, slightly raised blotches
• Stinging spots on the skin
• Mouth feels dry
• Lips are swollen and burning, with  
pearl-like blisters
• Blisters weep before becoming crusty
• As blisters dry up, they may develop into deep, 
painful cracks
• Warts are found anywhere on the body, but 
especially on the back of the hand
• Warts ooze or bleed easily
• Restless sleep
• Warts appear on the ﬁngers, near or even 
under the nails
• Possible warts on the face and eyelids
• Verrucas may be painful
• Scalp is dry, ﬂaky, and very hot
• Scalp is unbearably itchy at night
• Round, bare patches of scalp show through 
the hair
• Thick dandruff
• Scratching, particularly at night, causes the 
skin to burn
• Scalp becomes drier for washing the hair
• Great hair loss or graying of hair at a younger 
age than would normally be expected
• Hair loss possibly associated with eczema on 
the scalp
• Greater hair loss than usual following childbirth 
or during menopause
• Possible chronic headachesUrticaria with swelling on 
the lips and eyelids
Urticaria with violently 
itchy blotches
Sores on the lips and 
around the mouth
Soft, ﬂeshy, cauliﬂower-
shaped warts
Warts mainly near  
the nails
Dandruff with unbearable 
itching at night
Dandruff with skin that 
burns when scratched
Premature balding  
or graying
Hair loss due to  
hormonal changesSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•243 THE SKIN
• Irritability and nervousness
• Clumsiness and a tendency  
to drop things
• None apart from irritability due 
to discomfort of symptoms
• Depression
• Desire to be left alone
• Aversion to consolation
• Oversensitivity and vulnerability
• Disturbing dreams
• Pessimism and depression
• Intense sympathy for people in 
distress or for animals
• Emotionalism
• Restlessness and anxiety, 
especially upon waking in the 
middle of the night
• Lack of mental energy
• Lack of willpower
• Overcriticism of others but 
tolerance of one’s own failings
• Lack of self-conﬁdence
• Cowardice
• Anger
• Tearfulness
• Irritability
• Indifference to loved ones
• Aversion to sexual intercourse• For undressing
• For cool baths
• In cold air
• When lying down
• For gently massaging the  
affected area
• In fresh air
• For fasting
• For covering the affected area
• For warmth
• In damp conditions
• For warmth
• For cold drinks
• For warmth on the head
• For covering the head
• For walking around
• For cold
• For vegetables
• For drinking milk
• For relaxation or convalescence
• For warm drinks
• For applying hot compresses to 
the head
• For bathing in cold water
• For vigorous exercise• For heat
• In the late afternoon
• For sleep
• For touch
• In stuffy rooms
• For touch
• In cold, damp air
• In water and snow
• For scratching the skin
• At around 10 a.m.
• In cold, thundery weather
• For warmth
• In hot sun, sea air, or drafts
• For noise, music, or talking
• For jarring
• For physical or mental exertion
• For scratching or picking the wart
• In cold, damp living conditions
• After immunizations
• In cold air
• For sweet foods
• For coffee
• For emotional stress
• For cold
• For vegetables
• For drinking milk
• For warmth
• For washing
• Early in the morning
• For stress
• After childbirth
• Before menstruation
• During pregnancy, after childbirth, 
or following a miscarriage
• During the menopauseApis
(see page 104)   
30c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Urtica urens
(see page 170)   
6c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Nat. mur.
(see page 92)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 5 days
Thuja
(see page 64)   
6c twice daily  
up to 3 weeks
Causticum
(see page 79)   
6c twice daily  
up to 3 weeks
Arsen. alb.
(see page 79)   
6c 3 times daily  
up to 14 days
Sulphur
(see page 99)
6c 3 times daily
up to 14 days
Lycopodium
(see page 59)   
6c twice daily  
up to 4 weeks
Sepia
(see page 59)   
6c twice daily  
up to 4 weeksPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

244 •
EMOTIONAL PROBLEMS
Homeopathy is well suited to the treatment of emotional 
problems. As a holistic form of medicine, it examines all 
aspects of an individual—physical, intellectual, and 
spiritual—and a practitioner does not separate these elements when prescribing treatment. Homeopathic 
practitioners do not delineate where one ends and the other 
begins. The investigation of a person’s experience on  
a number of levels is helpful in dealing with ailments that HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
INSOMNIA
Insomnia describes a persistent pattern of intermittent sleep that 
leaves the sufferer feeling tired and unrefreshed. It may occur 
simply because the bedroom is too hot or airless, or because of 
having to get up during the night to urinate. It is more likely to be 
the result of being unwell or of pain—to which oversensitivity may 
develop—or of disturbed sleep patterns and exhaustion caused by 
regular sleep deprivation. Insomnia can also be caused by an excess 
of caffeine or alcohol, food allergy , overexcitement, stress, shock, 
anxiety  (see below) , or depression  (see page 212) .
SELF-HELP  Increase the amount of exercise you take during the day, 
and avoid eating late in the evening. Stop work or any other activity 
an hour before bedtime. Drink a relaxing herbal tea or hot milk, take 
a warm bath, and read something light and entertaining. With all the 
homeopathic remedies suggested, take the dose for ten consecutive 
nights (unless normal sleeping patterns are restored), and repeat the 
dose if you wake up during the night and cannot get back to sleep.
CAUTION  If there is no improvement within three weeks,  
consult a doctor.
IRRITABILITY & ANGER
These emotions are often a response to events that are perceived to 
be physically or psychologically threatening. They can be brought 
on by overindulgence, overwork, or exhaustion, or they may be 
associated with digestive ailments and, in men, premature 
ejaculation or impotence. Such feelings may lead to depression. 
Physical manifestations include an increased pulse rate, ﬂuttering 
feelings in the stomach, and tense muscles.
SELF-HELP  Get more exercise and practice relaxation techniques,  
meditation, or movement therapy such as tai chi  (see page 217) . 
Assertiveness training may help to overcome feelings of insecurity.
ANXIETY
Anxiety , or worry , consists of both an emotional and a physical 
imbalance, and tends to be provoked by overwork, stress, fear, or 
insecurity . It may be accompanied by an increased pulse rate, 
clammy skin, irregular sleep patterns, and appetite disturbance.
SELF-HELP  Avoid stressful situations and caffeine. Practice relaxation 
techniques or meditation  (see page 217) .
CAUTION  If you are feeling very anxious, with no obvious cause,  
see a doctor. If anxiety is accompanied by serious chest pains,  
call 911 .• Sudden onset of insomnia
• Sleep occurs eventually but is ﬁtful
• Oversensitivity to light, smell, noise, and touch
• Headache resembling a nail being driven into 
the head
• Wakefulness between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m., then 
more settled sleep just before it is time to get up
• Craving for stimulants, especially coffee during 
the day and alcohol in the evening
• Constipation with ineffectual urging
• Sudden onset of insomnia
• Fitful sleep associated with acute pain caused 
by injury, surgery, or exposure to biting wind
• Numbness in the limbs
• Continuous yawning but inability to get to sleep
• Lump in the throat
• Sensitivity to the cold
• Desire for alcohol and fatty or spicy foods
• Craving for sweet foods
• Feeling of hunger but full after a few bites
• Physical restlessness
• Chilliness • Exhaustion
• Possible craving for fatty foods
• Possible burning pains
• Desire for small sips of ﬂuid
• Strong craving for cold drinks and ice cream
• Burning feeling in the hands and up the back, 
particularly between the shoulder blades
• PalpitationsInsomnia with inability 
to relax
Insomnia with irritability
Insomnia with great fear
Insomnia with fear of 
never sleeping again
Irritability with  
overcritical attitude
Anger with insecurity
Anxiety with restlessness
Anxiety relieved by 
reassuranceSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•245 EMOTIONAL PROBLEMS
• Overactive mind
• Variety of emotions that are 
often brought on by news 
received
• Possible nightmares
• Irritability and oversensitivity
• Overcriticism of others
• Nervousness and restlessness
• Great fear of death, even to  
the extent of predicting the  
time of death
• Possible nightmares
• Growing apprehension about 
going to bed
• Rapid changes of mood
• Possible nightmares
• Anger that comes on quickly
• Awkwardness and intractability
• Overcriticism of others
• Lack of self-conﬁdence
• Cowardice
• Anger, possibly with violent 
outbursts at infrequent intervals
• Mental restlessness
• Great insecurity
• Anguish and preoccupation with 
death (worse for being alone)
• Fastidiousness masking anxiety
• Great nervousness
• Great sensitivity, affection, and 
sympathy toward others
• Fear and anxiety, especially in 
the dark and during thunder• For warmth
• When lying down
• For sucking ice
• When lying on either side
• When sitting
• For warmth
• In the evening
• In fresh air
• For warm perspiration
• For eating
• For urinating
• For walking around
• For warmth
• For sleep
• In the evening
• For sympathy
• In cool conditions
• For hot foods and drinks
• After midnight
• For warmth
• For warm foods and drinks
• For being in company
• For eating
• For sleep, even catnaps
• For general massage• For taking sleeping pills
• For strong smells
• For noise
• In fresh air
• In cold conditions
• When lying on the back
• For overeating, especially  
spicy foods
• In cold, windy weather
• For noise
• In warm rooms
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• For loud music
• In fresh air
• For cold
• For coffee or alcohol
• For cold
• For noise
• For overeating
• At around 4 a.m.
• In stuffy rooms
• For wearing tight clothing
• For overeating
• Between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
• For cold
• Between midnight and 2 a.m.
• For physical or mental exertion
• When lying on the back or side
• For stress
• Before and during thunderstorms
• For warm foodsCoffea
(see page 50)  
30c hourly before bed 
for 10 nights
Nux vomica
(see page 63)  
30c hourly before bed 
for 10 nights
Aconite
(see page 32)  
30c hourly before bed 
for 10 nights
Ignatia
(see page 57)  
30c hourly before bed  
for 10 nights
Nux vomica
(see page 63)  
30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses
Lycopodium
(see page 59)  
30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses
Arsen. alb.
(see page 68)  
30c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses if acute
Phosphorus
(see page 94)  30c every 2 hours  
up to 10 doses if acutereveal both a physical and a mental imbalance. Many 
emotional problems have their origins in stressful 
situations, exhaustion and overwork, dietary 
overindulgence or allergy , or fears and insecurities.  
By focusing on the response of the vital force of the body   
(see page 18)  to external problems, homeopathy can stimulate a person’s ability to cope with and modify those 
problems, at least in the short term. Homeopathic 
treatment for emotional problems is best combined in the 
long term with dietary changes, regular exercise, relaxation 
techniques or movement therapies, and stress management 
in order to maximize the benefits of treatment.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

246 •
CHILDREN’S HEALTH
Babyhood lasts from birth to one year old, a period of 
extremely rapid growth. The birth weight of a baby can 
double within six months and triple within a year. By one 
year, most babies can stand. Childhood as a stage of human development extends roughly from one to twelve years old. 
During this period the immune system flexes its muscles, 
so to speak, in readiness for puberty and adulthood.  
Illnesses contracted in childhood help to provide the body HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
COLIC
Colic is believed to be spasm of the intestines that causes a baby  
to scream, pull up its legs, and turn red. Colic occurs at about  
three months of age, usually in the evening, and for several hours.  
It may be aggravated by the mother’s tension or her diet (if she  
is breast-feeding), or by the baby gulping milk or swallowing air.
SELF-HELP  If breast-feeding, avoiding foods such as citrus fruits, 
strong spices, caffeine, legumes, and cows’-milk products may be 
helpful. If bottle-feeding, enlarge the nipple hole.
CAUTION  If the baby vomits or has diarrhea, see a doctor within  
12 hours. If the baby is pale and limp, call 911 .
DIAPER RASH
A baby’s buttocks, genitals, and even thighs may become red  
and sore due to contact with soiled diapers. This is caused by 
irritating chemicals released from urine and feces, or in the 
detergent used to wash nondisposable diapers. The rash may 
develop into candidiasis as a secondary infection, especially if a 
baby or breast-feeding mother is taking antibiotics.
SELF-HELP  Wash the baby’s bottom with a solution of calendula  
and hypericum, dry well, and apply calendula cream. Change the 
baby’s diapers frequently.
CAUTION  If the condition does not improve, consult a doctor.
TEETHING
Teething describes the discomfort that may arise during the 
eruption from the gums of a baby’s milk teeth. This usually  
starts at the age of about six months and continues until 
approximately the end of the child’s third year. Symptoms  
include sore gums, irritability , and upset stomach.
SELF-HELP  Combination R tissue salts  (see page 216)  may be  
given throughout the teething period.
CAUTION  If there is a high fever  (see page 248)  do not assume  
that it is a symptom of the teething, and consult a doctor.
TEMPER TANTRUMS
A young child has outbursts of anger, shouting, and crying when 
thwarted. The causes may be emotional tension within the family , a 
lack of parental affection, inconsistent disciplining by parents, which 
may produce insecurity , or simply a child testing the boundaries. 
Tantrums are exacerbated by teething, allergy , or digestive ailments.
SELF-HELP  Discipline a child consistently, and avoid arguments.  
Give the child plenty of attention except during a tantrum, when 
unacceptable behavior is best ignored. Distract the child from  
the undesirable behavior.
CAUTION  If problems persist, ask a doctor about family therapy.• Knees pulled up to the chest in response  
to sharp stomach pains
• Great distress
• Sudden onset of griping or shooting pains  
in the stomach that come in waves  
due to ﬂatulence • Bloated abdomen
• Pains are not relieved by burping
• Great distress
• Skin is generally dry and sensitive
• Skin in the diaper area is dry, red, scaly,  
and irritated
• Desire to scratch as soon as a diaper  
is removed
• Redness and blisters in the diaper area
• Extremely itchy skin
• Desire to scratch as soon as a diaper  
is removed
• Acutely inﬂamed gums that are sore  
when touched
• Diarrhea
• One cheek appears hot and red while  
the other is pale
• Face is hot and ﬂushed
• Staring eyes
• Mouth is hot and dry
• Gums are painful and inﬂamed
• Itching of the rectum and anus (tiny, white 
threadworms may be detected on adhesive tape 
placed across the anus ﬁrst thing in the morning)
• Grinding teeth during sleep
• One cheek may be red if the child is teething
• Stools may be green, watery, and smell  
like rotten eggs
• Possible convulsive symptoms in extreme 
cases, with child going into spasms of rageColic with knees pulled 
up to the chest
Colic with crying relieved 
by warmth
Dry rash on a baby with 
sensitive skin
Intensely itchy rash  
with blisters
Teething with irritability 
and anger
Teething with sudden 
pain and ﬂushed face
Temper tantrums in a 
child with threadworms
Child is impossible  
to pleaseSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•247 CHILDREN’S HEALTH
• Irritability
• Anger
• Irritability and restlessness
• Nervous appearance
• Irritability
• Dislike of being put to bed
• Great restlessness
• Agitation
• Great restlessness
• Anger
• Oversensitivity to pain
• Restlessness
• Tendency to lash out
• Irritability, anger,  
and aggression
• Rejection of all attempts  
to please
• Extreme irritability
• Oversensitivity to pain
• Dislike of being talked  
to or touched• For applying ﬁrm pressure  
to the stomach
• For warmth
• For sleep
• For releasing wind
• For warmth
• For warm baths
• For applying light pressure  
to the stomach
• In fresh air
• When warm and dry
• For changing position
• When warm and dry
• For being carried
• For applying cold compresses  
to the face
• For warmth
• For resting in bed
• When lying on  
the stomach
• For being carried over  
a parent’s shoulder
• For being carried
• For perspiring
• In mild weather• At around 4 p.m.
• In cold drafts
• If the mother is stressed
• For being fed
• In cold air
• At night
• For touch
• When lying on the right side
• For wearing too much clothing
• For being washed
• For being too warm
• For being undressed
• For getting wet
• In drafts
• When angry
• For heat
• In fresh air
• At night, from 9 p.m. onward
• For jarring and movement
• For light and noise
• For applying pressure to the gums
• When lying down and at night
• For touch
• For being looked at
• During a full moon
• In the presence of strangers
• When teething
• At night
• After breakfast
• For being talked to
• For touchColocynthis
(see page 52)   
6c every 5 minutes  
up to 10 doses
Mag. phos.
(see page 90)   
6c every 5 minutes  
up to 10 doses
Sulphur
(see page 99)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 5 days
Rhus tox.
(see page 162)   
6c 4 times daily  
up to 5 days
Chamomilla
(see page 46)   
30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses, or more often  
if acute
Belladonna
(see page 39)  30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses, or more often  
if acute
Cina
(see page 38)   
30c daily  
up to 7 days
Chamomilla
(see page 46)   
30c daily  
up to 7 dayswith the resistance to, and ultimately immunity against, 
many diseases in later life. Parents often prefer to treat their 
children with gentle, natural products to reduce the risk  
of side-effects, resorting to conventional drugs only when  
a child’s immune system is unable to cope with extremely 
serious ailments. Unless there is a congenital, genetic disability , a child’s immune system should respond well to 
homeopathic treatment. In most cases, a child’s vital force  
(see page 18)  will enable him or her to deal with many 
common threats to childhood health. Homeopathic remedies 
are easily administered to children  (see page 216 ) , and can 
help them bounce back to health quickly and efficiently .
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

248 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
SLEEPLESSNESS
Newborn babies need about 16 hours of sleep, 2-year-olds 12 hours, 
6-year-olds 10 hours, and 12-year-olds 9 hours. Sleeplessness in babies 
may be due to being hot or cold, hunger, a dirty diaper, teething  (see 
page 246) , colic  (see page 246) , or too much stimulation. In older 
children it may be caused by being hot or cold, irregular bedtimes, 
caffeine in carbonated drinks, other food allergy , noise, stress, or 
anxiety . Nightmares may result from watching television or videos.
SELF-HELP  Keep a baby’s or young child’s room at 64–68°F (16–20°C). 
Establish a bedtime routine: bath, last feeding, then bed, at the same 
time every day, and avoid overstimulation. If a child wakes frequently 
during the night and becomes overtired, bring bedtime forward by 
15 minutes every 3 nights until the child sleeps through. Maintain this 
bedtime, and then gradually put it back by 15-minute intervals. Look for 
the underlying causes of sleeplessness. Do not punish a child by 
sending him or her to a bedroom, which will acquire bad associations.
CAUTION  If the problem persists, consult a doctor.
BED-WETTING (NOCTURNAL ENURESIS)
By the end of their second year, most children have a degree of bladder 
control. Daytime control is usually achieved between 18 months and  
3 years of age: nighttime control may take another year. About  
10 percent of 4- to 5-year-olds wet the bed regularly . Primary bed-
wetting means a child has never been dry at night. This may be due  
to immaturity of the nervous system or to psychological reasons—for 
example, a child’s diapers may not have been changed often enough, 
so that he or she did not learn what it felt like to be dry . Secondary 
bed-wetting means a child was dry for a time but then starts to wet  
the bed again—because of emotional stress, for example.
SELF-HELP  With primary bed-wetting, encourage a child of 7 or over to 
take control—by changing soiled sheets, for example.
CAUTION  If there is a burning sensation on passing urine with secondary 
bed-wetting, see a doctor within 48 hours.
FEVER
A rise in body temperature above 98°F (37°C) usually indicates 
that the body is ﬁghting infection. In young children, however, 
before the temperature regulation mechanism has matured, 
temperature may rise simply because the child is overheated. Other 
symptoms of fever include restlessness and hot skin.
SELF-HELP  Remove the child’s clothes and sponge him or her all over 
with tepid water. Open the windows or use a fan to cool the air. 
Provide plenty of ﬂuids. If the child’s temperature rises above 102°F 
(39°C), or if there is a history of febrile convulsions (seizures induced 
by high temperature), give children’s acetaminophen.
CAUTION  If the child suffers a febrile convulsion—abnormal breathing 
and limb movements, rolling eyes, and a loss of consciousness—  
try to lower the child’s temperature and consult a doctor. If the child  
is unconscious for more than ﬁve minutes, call 911 . If fever is 
accompanied by symptoms of meningitis (inﬂammation of the 
membranes around the brain)—severe headache, nausea and 
vomiting, abnormal drowsiness, oversensitivity to light, a stiff neck, 
and a rash that does not fade when pressure is applied— call 911 .• Eyes are half-open when asleep
• Moaning during sleep
• Legs are wide apart when asleep
• Possible dizziness, numbness, ﬂushing,  
and fainting
• Wakefulness any time between midnight  
and 4 a.m.
• Possible feeling of paralysis anywhere  
in the body
• Wakefulness in the early morning with  
a desire to play
• Possible association with teething or pain
• Overtiredness
• Urination while dreaming
• Urination in ﬁrst stage of sleep as a habit
• Symptoms especially associated with children 
who feel the cold easily
• Urination soon after falling asleep
• Possible association with coughing ﬁts
• Reluctance to go to sleep unless soothed
• Deep sleep prevents child from waking in time 
to get to a toilet
• Urination during dreams and in the early  
part of the night
• Sudden onset of fever
• Pale face
• Great thirst
• Shivers, especially after exposure to cold, dry 
wind, even though temperature is raised
• Sudden onset of violent fever, with  
pounding pulse
• Skin is dry and hot
• Face is ﬂushed
• Staring eyes
• Body feels cold but skin is hot and dry
• Thirst for small sips of water
• Exhaustion
• Burning pains in the limbs
• Cold sweatsAnger and irritability that 
prevents sleep
Sleeplessness  
after shock
Early waking
Bed-wetting while 
dreaming
Bed-wetting soon after 
falling asleep
Bed-wetting during  
deep sleep
Sudden rise in 
temperature after 
exposure to cold
Sudden rise in 
temperature with burning, 
hot skin
Fever with exhaustionSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•249 CHILDREN’S HEALTH
• Anger
• Refusal to be calmed unless 
carried around
• Fear of death on waking  
from sleep
• Anxiety
• Restlessness
• Overexcitement
• Agitation and nervous tension
• Possible nightmares
• Indolence
• Displeasure
• Excitability
• Oversensitivity
• Excitability
• Restlessness
• Irritability
• Peevishness
• Restlessness
• Tearfulness
• Delirium with unusual noises 
and jerky movements
• Restlessness
• Anxiety
• Stupor or delirium• For being carried
• In warm, wet weather
• For not eating snacks  
before bedtime
• For rest
• For being in quiet surroundings
• For reassurance
• For warmth
• When lying down
• For catnaps
• In warm, damp weather
• For being in a warm bed
• For warmth
• For being cuddled
• For movement
• In fresh air
• For sleeping
• When standing or sitting upright
• For warmth
• Head is better for cold but 
extremities are better for heat
• In the open air
• For applying warm, dry 
compresses all over the body• For being overheated
• In cold, windy weather
• For burping
• At night, from 9 p.m. onward
• For a shock or fright
• On exposure to cold, dry winds
• At night
• For too much excitement
• For sleeping in a draft
• For noise
• For cold
• For strong smells
• When lying on the right side
• For movement
• When lying on a full bladder
• For touch
• In cold, dry weather
• Between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m.
• For physical or mental exertion
• When teething
• For cold
• When lying down
• For touch
• In warm rooms
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• At around midnight
• For jarring and movement
• For light and noise
• For applying pressure to  
painful areas
• When lying on the right side
• At night
• Between midnight and 2 a.m.
• For physical exertion
• For cold drinks and foodsChamomilla
(see page 46)  30c half-hourly  
from 1 hour before bedtime  
up to 10 doses
Aconite
(see page 32)  30c half-hourly  
from 1 hour before bedtime  
up to 10 doses
Coffea
(see page 50)  30c half-hourly  
from 1 hour before bedtime  
up to 10 doses
Equisetum
(see page 142)   
6c once before bed  
up to 14 nights
Causticum
(see page 79)  6c once before bed 
up to 14 nights
Kreosotum
(see page 151)   
6c once before bed  
up to 14 nights
Aconite
(see page 32)   
30c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Belladonna
(see page 39)   
30c hourly  
up to 10 doses
Arsen. alb.
(see page 68)   
6c hourly  
up to 10 dosesPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

250 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
GLUE EAR
Recurrent infections may result in overactivity of the mucous 
membrane lining the middle ear and inadequate drainage via the 
eustachian tube. This results in a build-up of sticky ﬂuid and the 
poor transmission of sounds, hence reduced hearing. Glue ear may 
also be due to allergy . The insertion of a grommet (a small tube 
passed through the eardrum) may be necessary to drain the ﬂuid 
and aerate the middle ear.
SELF-HELP  If symptoms persist, investigate the possibility of allergy  
to food or atmospheric irritants. If a child is catarrhal, eliminate dairy 
products from the diet, but only for one month.
CAUTION  If deafness persists, see a doctor within a month.
TONSILLITIS
The tonsils are two sacs of lymphatic tissue at the back of the throat 
that form part of the body’s immune system  (see page 204) . They 
often become infected, especially during childhood. Symptoms 
include sore or painful throat, fever, and general malaise. The 
tonsils look bright red at ﬁrst, then become covered with a slimy , 
whitish coating. The glands in the neck may become enlarged.
SELF-HELP  Encourage the child to rest, drink plenty of ﬂuids, and take 
garlic preparations. Apply alternate hot and cold compresses around 
the neck. Gargling with sage tea may soothe the soreness or pain  
in the throat.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist for more than 48 hours, see a doctor. If 
temperature rises above 102°F (39°C), see a doctor within 12 hours.
CROUP
Resulting from an infection of the larynx, epiglottis, or trachea, or 
from an obstruction of the airway , croup causes a sudden narrowing 
of the larynx, which produces hoarseness, wheezing, stridor 
(grunting while breathing), and a distinctive, barking cough.
SELF-HELP  Humidify the bedroom or, during a coughing ﬁt, put the 
child in a bathroom with all hot faucets on. Stay with the child.
CAUTION  If there is fever, call a doctor within two hours. If stridor is 
acute with no sign of infection and there are breathing difﬁculties, 
call 911 .
WHOOPING COUGH
This highly infectious, bacterial illness is serious in young childr en, 
and is occasionally fatal in babies. The incubation period is  
1–2 weeks. A child is most infectious during the ﬁrst week, and 
may remain infectious for up to three weeks. A fever is followed  
by spasmodic coughing characterized by a whooping noise. 
Complications include pneumonia and brain damage.
CAUTION  If you suspect that a child has contracted whooping cough, 
see a doctor within 48 hours. Antibiotics can minimize severity, but 
follow up with an acidophilic supplement, such as live yogurt,  
to reestablish beneﬁcial intestinal bacteria. If a child turns blue 
during coughing, see a doctor within two hours.• Possible discharge of mucus from the ear
• Pain or congested feeling in the ear
• Swollen neck glands
• Head sweats
• Possible association with exposure to drafts
• Catarrh drips down the back of the throat from 
the sinuses
• Pain or congested feeling in the ear
• Dull ache or boring pain in the bridge of the nose
• Tendency to produce catarrh
• Throat is sore and tender and neck feels stiff
• Right tonsil is often the worse affected
• Spasms of pain in the throat on moving
• High fever, red face, and dilated pupils
• Tongue has a strawberry-like appearance
• Stabbing pain in the throat
• Unpleasant-smelling breath
• Hoarseness or loss of voice
• Yellow mucus is coughed up
• Tenderness and swelling of the neck glands
• Chilliness
• Throat is dark red, sore, and swollen
• Copious saliva that burns when swallowed
• Tongue feels swollen and has a yellow coating
• Unpleasant-smelling breath
• Copious, offensive-smelling perspiration
• Sudden coughing and breathlessness
• Cough is hollow-sounding and resembles barking
• Possible great thirst
• Dry, harsh, barking cough
• Constriction and dryness in throat
• Cough resembling a saw going through wood
• Throat is dry and tickly
• Cough is so violent that the child vomits and 
can scarcely catch its breath between bouts
• Child clutches its stomach in pain from coughing
• Chilliness
• Dry, hacking cough that starts at around  
3 a.m.
• Chilliness
• Exhaustion
• Eyelids are puffy, especially the upper eyelidsGlue ear with swollen 
neck glands
Glue ear with thick, 
stringy mucus
Tonsillitis with red face, 
high fever, and delirium
Tonsillitis with sensation 
as though a ﬁsh bone  
is stuck in the throat
Tonsillitis with dribbling  
of saliva onto the pillow
Croup that comes  
on suddenly
Persistent croup
Whooping cough  
with vomiting
Whooping cough that  
is worse after midnightSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•251 CHILDREN’S HEALTH
• Anxiety and insecurity
• Many fears, including concern 
about death and dying
• Possible nightmares
• Irritability
• Despondency
• Possible delirium with 
hallucinations about fantastic 
shapes or scary things
• Touchiness and oversensitivity
• Unreasonableness and tendency 
to lash out
• Irritability and emotionalism
• Shyness and tendency to  
be withdrawn
• Oversensitivity to emotions
• Great fear caused by sudden 
onset and nature of symptoms
• Restlessness in bed
• Waking at night in great fear
• Alternating moods
• Restlessness
• Suspicion
• Anxiety
• Anger that develops easily
• Dislike of being alone
• Fear of the dark and ghosts
• Anxiety
• Irritability
• Jumpiness• When slightly constipated
• When lying on the affected  
side
• In dry weather
• For warmth
• For movement
• For vomiting
• When standing or sitting upright
• For warmth
• For resting in bed
• For eating
• For warmth
• When the neck is warmly wrapped
• For rest
• When warmly dressed
• In fresh air
• For humidity
• For warm perspiration
• For bending forward
• For warm food and drinks
• For applying pressure to the chest
• In the open air
• For walking
• When sitting up in bed
• For keeping quiet
• For warmth
• When sitting with the elbows  
on the knees
• In the open air• For physical or mental exertion
• Between 2 a.m. and 3 a.m.
• In cold, raw wind
• In the morning
• In hot weather
• In spring
• If the head becomes chilled
• For slight jarring or movement
• For light and noise
• At night
• In cold air and drafts
• For undressing
• For touching the throat
• When lying on the affected side
• In extremes of temperature
• For perspiring
• At night
• When lying on the right side
• On exposure to cold, dry winds
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• At night
• On swallowing, talking,  
and coughing
• For dry, cold wind
• For exertion and motion
• Midnight–2 a.m.
• After midnight
• When lying on the left side
• For warmth
• For talking and laughing
• For cold and drafts
• Between 2 a.m. and 3 a.m.
• For physical or mental exertionCalc. carb.
(see page 77)  
6c 3 times daily 
up to 14 days
Kali. bich.
(see page 87)  
6c 3 times daily 
up to 14 days
Belladonna
(see page 39)  
30c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Hepar sulph.
(see page 84)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Aconite
(see page 32)  30c right away, then 
half an hour later if child is awake
Spongia
(see page 85)  
6c hourly 
up to 6 doses
Drosera
(see page 141)  6c once after every 
coughing bout up to 2 days
Kali. carb.
(see page 88)  6c once after every 
coughing bout up to 2 daysSYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS

252 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
CHICKEN POX
This highly infectious, viral disease is spread in droplets of mucus 
expelled in coughs and sneezes from an infected child or an adult 
with shingles. Incubation is 13–17 days. Symptoms are a slight 
fever for 24 hours, followed by the eruption of a rash and  
a worsening of the fever. Clusters of small, red, itchy spots evolve 
into ﬂuid-ﬁlled blisters, which heal in 6–10 days. A child is 
infectious from just before the onset of fever until all the spots heal. 
Scratched spots may become infected and leave pockmarks. Most 
children recover completely , but the virus may lie dormant and  
be triggered in adulthood as shingles.
SELF-HELP  To soothe the spots, rub in honey or vitamin E cream on 
unbroken skin, dab on baking soda solution (1 tsp soda to ¾ cup 
water), or take an oatmeal herbal bath.
CAUTION  If you suspect that your child has chicken pox, consult a 
doctor within 24 hours. If the temperature is still high two days after 
the rash appears, or if the child seems very ill and chesty, see  
a doctor within two hours because of a risk of pneumonia.
MEASLES
A highly infectious, viral disease, measles is spread in droplets  
of mucus expelled in coughs and sneezes. The incubation period  
is about ten days, after which the ﬁrst symptoms develop—an 
inﬂamed throat, runny nose, dry cough, red and watering eyes,  
and fever. After 3–4 days, dark red spots appear, which may join 
up to form blotches. A child is infectious from the ﬁrst symptoms 
until ﬁve days after the rash develops. Complications include acute 
middle-ear infection, bronchitis  (see page 228) , encephalitis 
(inﬂammation of the brain), and febrile convulsions.
SELF-HELP  Give the child plenty of water and a light diet until the 
runny nose and the cough clear up. Treat as for fever  (see page 
248). Bathe the eyes with a saline solution (1 tsp salt to ¾ cup  
boiled, cooled water).
CAUTION  If fever persists, or if the child feels ill after the rash begins 
to fade or has an earache, see a doctor within 12 hours.
MUMPS
A viral infection of certain salivary glands (the parotids in front  
of the ear and the submandibulars in the lower jaw), mumps is 
spread by droplets of mucus expelled in coughs and sneezes. The 
incubation period is 2–3 weeks and a child may be infectious for  
a week before the symptoms appear. These include fever, headache, 
and pain in front of the ears as the glands become swollen. The 
swelling subsides within ten days, during which time a child is still 
infectious. Complications may include meningitis or inﬂammation 
of the pancreas, ovaries, or testes. Rarely , the effect of this disorder 
on the reproductive organs results in sterility .
SELF-HELP  Avoid acidic drinks, such as citrus fruit juices, since these 
will stimulate the salivary glands, causing pain.
CAUTION  If there is a severe headache, oversensitivity to light, 
confusion, drowsiness, or any other symptoms of meningitis, see  
a doctor within two hours. If the testicles or ovaries are painful,  
see a doctor within 12 hours.• Sudden rise in temperature
• Hot, ﬂushed face, with cold extremities 
(ﬁngers, hands, toes, and feet)
• Possible staring eyes
• Sensitivity to noise and light
• Extremely itchy rash
• Fever
• Restlessness
• Headache that develops from a stiff neck
• Lack of thirst despite high temperature
• Typical rash
• Thick, bland, yellow discharge from the nose
• Chilliness but a desire for fresh air
• Lack of thirst despite high temperature
• Oversensitivity to light
• Dry cough at night with mucus coughed up in 
the morning, and thick, green catarrh by day
• Nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
• Tiny, raised white spots in the mouth
• Rash appears slowly
• Fever
• Great but infrequent thirst
• Dry, hacking cough
• Headache that is worse for coughing
• Rash disappears very slowly
• Spots turn purple
• Increased appetite
• Great desire for sweet foods
• Sudden rise in temperature
• Hot, ﬂushed face
• Parotid gland on the right side is  
worse affected
• Wide, staring eyes
• Pain on swallowing that extends from the 
throat to the ears
• Submandibular glands are swollen and as hard 
as stones
• Restlessness and a desire to move, but 
movement makes the symptoms worse
• Glands on the right are the worse affected
• Offensive-smelling and unpleasant-tasting 
saliva that dribbles onto the pillow  
during sleep
• Offensive-smelling, copious perspiration
• Tongue is swollen, with tooth imprintsFirst stage of chicken pox
Chicken pox with 
restlessness
Chicken pox with lack  
of thirst during fever
First stage of measles 
with lack of thirst  
during fever
Second stage of measles 
with dry, hacking cough
Second stage of measles 
with a rash that is slow  
to disappear
Mumps with sudden 
onset of fever and 
ﬂushed face
Mumps with pain in the 
ears on swallowing
Mumps with perspiration 
and dribbling  
when asleepSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•253 CHILDREN’S HEALTH
• Possible hallucinations  
and delirium
• Great restlessness
• Tearfulness and a tendency  
to cling to an adult
• Self-pity • Great desire for 
attention and comfort
• Great tearfulness and misery
• Desire for plenty of sympathy
• Great irritability
• Reluctance to be moved
• Irritability
• Anxiety
• Possible hallucinations  
and delirium
• Tearfulness at night
• Indifference
• Confusion when sitting up
• Irritability and emotionalism,  
or shyness and introversion
• Emotional oversensitivity• When lying on the front
• For bending backward
• In a darkened room
• For being lightly covered
• For changing position
• For continuous movement
• For warmth
• In dry air
• For applying hot compresses, 
especially to the head
• In the open air
• For applying cold compresses  
to the itchy areas
• For gentle movement
• For crying and sympathy
• With the hands above the head
• For gentle movement
• In fresh air
• For applying cold compresses  
to the rash
• For rest
• In cool air
• For applying cold compresses  
to the rash
• In the open air
• For applying warm compresses  
to the rash
• When lying on the front
• For applying pressure to the 
affected glands
• For cold drinks
• For rest
• For warmth
• For rest
• When warmly dressed
• In the morning• In sunlight
• For jarring
• For stooping
• When lying with the head lower 
than the body
• For heat
• For rest and when ﬁrst moving
• In cold and wet conditions
• In drafts, even if only small areas 
of the body are exposed
• In hot rooms
• For warmth
• At twilight and in the early evening
• For heat
• In extremes of temperature
• When lying on the painful side
• In the evening and at night
• For noise and bright light
• In the morning and at around  
9 p.m. and 3 a.m.
• For the slightest movement
• For baths
• For becoming overheated
• For physical or mental exertion
• In sunlight • For jarring
• When stooping
• When lying with the head lower 
than the body
• For heat
• For getting out of bed
• For walking around
• For swallowing
• In extremes of temperature
• For perspiring
• At night
• When lying on the right sideBelladonna
(see page 39)  
30c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Rhus tox.
(see page 162)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 10 doses
Bryonia
(see page 42)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Sulphur
(see page 99)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Belladonna
(see page 39)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Phytolacca
(see page 159)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 10 dosesPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

254 •
HEALTH IN ADOLESCENCE
Adolescence describes the transition from childhood  
to adulthood, and is ushered in by hormonal changes that 
occur at about 10 or 11 years of age in girls and a year  
or so later in boys. Height and weight are gained during adolescence, but more significant is the progression to sexual 
maturity . In boys, this takes the form of an enlargement  
of the genitals and the larynx, and the appearance of body 
hair; in girls, it involves the development of breasts and body HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
INFECTIOUS MONONUCLEOSIS
This viral infection is spread by personal contact. It starts like 
inﬂuenza, with fever, sore throat, headache, and general aches  
and pains. Within a day or two the lymph glands, especially  
those in the throat, become swollen and painful and the tonsils 
enlarged and dirty-looking. There may be a rash, and—in rare 
cases—jaundice. Although symptoms usually wear off in two  
or three weeks, full recovery may take longer and lethargy may  
last for months. Stress, such as that generated by overworking  
for exams or the breakup of a relationship, may increase 
susceptibility to mononucleosis.
SELF-HELP  Rest in bed until acute symptoms abate, after which avoid 
strenuous exercise and do only 75 percent of what you are capable 
of doing, both physically and mentally, until recovery is complete.
CAUTION  See a doctor for a blood test to conﬁrm the diagnosis.
BODY ODOR
Sweat glands in the groin and underarms become functional at 
about 15 or 16 in girls and a year or two later in boys. Most anxiety 
about body odor occurs as a result of the unfamiliar smell rather 
than an excess of perspiration. The odor becomes offensive when 
bacteria breed in the stale sweat. Perspiration may be increased by 
stress and during menstruation in girls.
SELF-HELP  Wash thoroughly every day using alkaline soap, which will 
discourage the proliferation of bacteria.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist, consult a doctor.
EXAM NERVES
This describes a state of extreme anxiety about taking exams that 
almost amounts to a phobia  (see page 211) . Psychological symptoms 
include a feeling of panic and an inability to concentrate. Physical 
symptoms include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and headache.  
The condition may be exacerbated by other problems—for example, 
difﬁculty in studying at home or pressure to achieve high grades. 
Constitutional homeopathic treatment  (see page 176)  may be required.
SELF-HELP  Time management is the key to controlling anxiety. Start 
studying well in advance; draw up a timetable that divides subjects 
into manageable units and covers all topics adequately; and  
always include time out. Also, make sure that you get enough rest. 
Remedies should be taken on the day of the exam but also for some 
days before whenever symptoms appear.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist, consult a doctor.• Tonsils are swollen and purple, with weeping 
ulcers, and swallowing is difﬁcult
• Tongue is cracked and parched, and teeth  
have a brown coating
• Great physical exhaustion
• Possible headache and muscular pain
• Throat is dark red, sore, and swollen
• Saliva burns the throat on swallowing
• Tongue feels swollen and is yellow-coated  
with tooth imprints
• Offensive-smelling breath
• Copious, smelly perspiration
• Tonsils are dark red
• Shooting pain up to the ears on swallowing
• Swallowing food and hot drinks  
is especially painful
• Perspiration smells sour
• Perspiration on the back of the head during 
sleep that wets the pillow
• Profuse perspiration in the morning
• Profuse perspiration for only moderate exertion
• Copious, unpleasant-smelling perspiration
• Perspiration occurs in both hot and  
cold conditions
• Possible large amounts of saliva
• Diarrhea and possibly nausea and vomiting 
before an exam • Watery stools
• Diarrhea accompanied by copious gas
• Diarrhea immediately after eating or drinking
• Sensation as though there is a plug or lump 
somewhere, usually in the throat or rectum
• Sensation as though a weight were pressing 
down on the shoulders
• Possible worsening of eczema in sufferers
• Limbs feel weak and wobbly
• Possible aches and pains resembling the 
onset of inﬂuenzaMononucleosis with 
enlarged tonsils  
and ulcers
Mononucleosis with 
offensive perspiration
Mononucleosis with pain 
on swallowing food and 
hot drinks
Body odor in overweight 
people who feel the  
cold easily
Body odor from perspiring 
in hot and  
cold conditions
Exam nerves  
with diarrhea
Exam nerves with inability 
to remember anything
Exam nerves with weak, 
wobbly legsSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•255 HEALTH IN ADOLESCENCE
• Mental dullness and  
apparent stupidity
• Confusion
• Great anxiety or depression,  
with constant sighing
• Irritability and emotionalism  
or shyness and introversion
• Emotional oversensitivity
• Restlessness
• Indifference to life
• Fear of dying
• Depression
• Apprehension
• Forgetfulness
• Concern about appearing  
insane to others
• Irritability and emotionalism
• Shyness and introversion
• Emotional oversensitivity
• Fear of failure
• Lack of self-conﬁdence
• Self-doubt that undermines 
concentration
• Lack of self-conﬁdence
• Internal conﬂict that undermines 
concentration and the retention  
of information
• Fear of having to perform
• Virtual paralysis with fear when 
thinking about an exam despite 
great efforts to study• For hot drinks
• When lying on the right side
• For rest
• When warmly dressed
• In the morning
• When lying on the stomach
• For rest
• For warmth
• In dry weather
• In the morning
• After breakfast
• For rest
• When warmly dressed
• In the morning
• In cold air
• For washing the face in cold water
• For sitting
• For burping
• For eating
• For heat
• For hot baths
• For urinating
• For perspiring
• With the eyes closed• For sitting up
• At the sight of food
• For movement
• In extremes of temperature
• For perspiring
• At night
• When lying on the right side
• For getting out of bed
• For movement
• For swallowing
• For hot foods and drinks
• During the hours of darkness
• For cold
• For mainly physical but also 
mental exertion
• For stress
• For drinking milk
• In extremes of temperature
• For perspiring
• At night
• When lying on the right side
• For eating sugar
• For eating cold foods
• In crowds
• For emotional stress
• In the evening up until midnight
• For mental exertion
• For emotional stress
• In humid weather
• For smoking tobaccoAilanthus
(see page 122)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Phytolacca
(see page 159)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 10 doses
Calc. carb.
(see page 77)  
6c hourly 
up to 10 doses
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)  
6c hourly 
up to 10 doses
Argentum nit.
(see page 74)  
6c hourly 
up to 10 doses before an exam
Anacardium occ.
(see page 124)   
6c hourly 
up to 10 doses before an exam
Gelsemium
(see page 144)  6c hourly 
up to 10 doses before an examhair, and the onset of menstrual periods. Emotionally and 
intellectually , adolescence is a time of great change as  
a teenager veers between dependence and independence, 
and peers very often become more important role models 
than parents. Many of the disorders encountered during 
adolescence result from the great hormonal changes that  take place at this stage of life. Ailments may be exacerbated 
by emotional, academic, and peer-group pressures, and may 
require long-term, constitutional homeopathic treatment  
in some cases  (see page 176) . Homeopathic remedies and 
other self-help measures can help address bodily imbalances 
in the short term.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

256 •
WOMEN’S HEALTH
The average woman ovulates about 400 times between 
puberty and the menopause, usually at intervals of around 
28 days. If an egg is fertilized, pregnancy follows; if not,  
the lining of the uterus is shed during menstruation. The functioning of the female reproductive system  (see page 198)  
is controlled by the pituitary gland, which in turn takes its 
orders from the hypothalamus in the brain. A variety of 
disturbances and imbalances in the body may modify the HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME (PMS)
PMS affects 75 percent of women to some degree over several  
days preceding a menstrual period, and includes physiological  
and psychological symptoms. Many women continue to lead more  
or less normal lives despite feeling glum and irritable, but in 
ten percent of cases symptoms are seriously debilitating. Physical 
symptoms include tender, swollen breasts and abdomen, ﬂuid 
retention, and minor period-type pains. PMS may be exacerbated 
by hormonal or nutritional imbalance, stress, overwork, allergy , 
and psychological factors such as depression.
SELF-HELP  Avoid salty or fatty foods, junk foods, sugar, tea, coffee, 
and alcohol. Eat regular, small, protein-rich snacks, but reduce meat 
intake. Take 30 minutes of outdoor exercise daily and practice 
relaxation techniques  (see page 217)  or meditation. If you smoke, 
stop. Pace yourself in order to avoid stress.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist, consult a doctor.
PAINFUL PERIODS (DYSMENORRHEA)
Discomfort is common during the ﬁrst few days of a menstrual 
period. Symptoms include a dull ache in the lower back or 
abdomen, or severe abdominal cramps. Pain may be exacerbated  
by stress, but may improve after childbirth or once a woman 
reaches her thirties. Sudden pain after years of pain-free periods 
may indicate pelvic infection, endometriosis (formation of cysts  
in the pelvic cavity from bleeding fragments of uterus lining) or 
ﬁbroids  (see page 199) . The use of intrauterine devices or coming 
off the contraceptive pill can also result in painful menstruation.
SELF-HELP  Eat plenty of raw fruits and vegetables. Get plenty of 
exercise and lose weight if you need to. Between periods, take the 
occasional short, cold bath; during the week before a period, take  
a long, hot bath every other night. A physiotherapist or osteopath 
may be able to relieve associated back pain.
CAUTION  If periods are consistently more painful, see a doctor.
ABSENT PERIODS (AMENORRHEA)
The absence of periods may be permanent or temporary . If periods 
have not started by the age of 16 (primary amenorrhea), the cause is 
delayed puberty . If menstruation is established but periods suddenly 
stop (secondary amenorrhea), this may be due to anorexia or great 
weight loss, or excessive exercise (especially if the diet is vegetarian). 
Amenorrhea can also be caused by stress, travel (particularly long-haul 
ﬂights), shock, emotional stress, coming off the contraceptive pill, or 
hormonal imbalance. Rarely , it is due to displacement of the uterus, (if 
it is tilted backward). Periods may also be delayed after childbirth.
CAUTION  If periods are absent for more than 9 months, consult a doctor.• Greasy skin, possibly with acne
• Craving for salty or sweet foods
• Weariness, especially in the morning
• Sensation as though the uterus is falling out
• Possible sinus problems, sore throat,  
and ﬂushes
• Fluid retention that exacerbates any  
weight problem • Lack of energy
• Swollen, tender breasts and painful joints
• Possible vaginal discharge or thrush
• Craving for sweet foods • Bloated stomach
• Swollen face, especially upper eyelids
• Headaches, nausea, and dizziness
• Yellowish vaginal discharge
• Cramps in the uterus causing nausea or 
vomiting • Tenderness in the abdomen
• Tearing pain in the lower abdomen
• Possible migraine or diarrhea
• Blood ﬂow includes clots or is very scanty
• Sharp, piercing pain in the lower abdomen
• Sensation as though the uterus is falling out
• Cramps possibly accompanied by migraine, 
acne, weakness, perspiration, and fainting
• Colicky, spasmodic pain
• Blood ﬂow includes clots
• Dark, stringy, and tarry blood ﬂow
• Period starts ahead of schedule
• Feeling of heaviness and aching pain in the 
ovaries • Sharp, shooting pain in the uterus
• Abdomen is inﬂated and sensitive
• Vagina is hot, dry, and sensitive
• Possibly no symptoms speciﬁcally related  
to the reproductive organs
• Possible lump in the throat
• Possible headache resembling a nail being 
driven into the headPMS with apathy, 
irritability, and 
tearfulness
PMS with swollen, tender 
breasts
PMS with self-pity
Abdominal pain with 
depression and self-pity
Abdominal pain with 
irritability, tearfulness, 
and indifference
Abdominal pain soothed 
by heat and pressure
Periods stop abruptly 
after a shock
Periods stop after 
emotional stressSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•257 WOMEN’S HEALTH
• Irritability and tearfulness
• Difﬁculty in concentrating
• Desire to get away from it all
• Fits of anger and screaming
• Reduction in sex drive
• Irritability and tearfulness
• Depression
• Indifference
• Difﬁculty in concentrating
• Self-pity and depression
• Sudden tearfulness 
• Apprehension about the future
• Anxiety in crowded places
• Self-pity and great tearfulness  
at the slightest provocation
• Desire for comfort  
and reassurance
• Depression
• Irritability and tearfulness
• Desire to be left alone
• Indifference to loved ones
• Irritability, anxiety, and 
oversensitivity
• Fixation about pain
• Possible fear of thunderstorms 
and of darkness
• Great fear and anxiety
• Nervousness and panic in fear 
of death, even to the extent  
of predicting the time of death
• Suppression of emotions with 
fear of showing feelings at 
inappropriate times
• Mood swings between laughter 
and tearfulness
• Possible hysteria• For eating
• For sleep
• For vigorous exercise
• For heat
• In the morning
• When slightly constipated
• For crying • For sympathy
• For exercise
• In fresh air
• For cold drinks
• For crying and sympathy
• With the hands above the head
• For gentle exercise
• In fresh air
• For cold drinks
• When lying on the right side with 
knees pulled up to the chest
• For eating, sleeping, and exercise
• For applying hot compresses  
to the abdomen
• For warmth
• For hot baths
• For applying pressure  
to the abdomen
• When bending double
• In fresh air
• For rest
• For warm perspiration
• For bending double
• For eating
• For urinating
• For heat• For cold
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• For mental exertion
• In the early morning  
and early evening
• In drafts
• In cold, damp, windy weather
• For overexertion
• Between 2 a.m. and 3 a.m.
• For warmth
• In the sun
• For rich, fatty foods
• In the evening and at night
• For heat
• In extremes of temperature
• For rich, fatty foods
• When lying on the painful area
• In the evening and at night
• For cold
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• For mental exertion
• In the early morning and between 
4 p.m. and 6 p.m.
• In cold air and drafts
• For being uncovered
• At night
• For being exhausted
• For movement
• In warm rooms
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• In the evening and at night
• In dry, cold wind
• In fresh air and cold conditions
• For wearing too much clothing
• For coffee or alcohol
• For strong smells
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• In the morningSepia
(see page 112)  
30c twice daily 
up to 3 days, starting 1 day  
before PMS due
Calc. carb.
(see page 77)   30c twice daily 
up to 3 days, starting 1 day  
before PMS due
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
30c twice daily up to 3 days, 
starting 1 day before PMS due
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
30c hourly 
up to 10 doses
Sepia
(see page 112)  
30c hourly 
up to 10 doses
Mag. phos.
(see page 90)  
30c hourly 
up to 10 doses
Aconite
(see page 32)  
30c twice daily 
up to 14 days
Ignatia
(see page 57)  
30c twice daily 
up to 14 daysbrain’s influence over the pituitary gland, thus upsetting 
hormone levels, which many women believe are responsible 
for their psychological as well as physiological problems.  
A holistic view of the workings of the female body is well 
suited to the application of homeopathic principles, and 
there is much anecdotal evidence of homeopathy’s success  in treating women’s complaints. Homeopathic remedies can 
provide an attractive alternative to conventional treatments 
such as hormone replacement therapy (HRT)—which may 
have unpleasant side-effects—and are particularly suitable 
for the treatment of recurring ailments associated with the 
reproductive cycle.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

258 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
HEAVY PERIODS (MENORRHAGIA)
Heavy periods are deﬁned as those with profuse bleeding, or 
ﬂooding, which quickly soaks through any sanitary protection and 
may include large clots of blood, or bleeding that continues for more 
than seven days. They may be due to pelvic infection, hormonal 
imbalance, ﬁbroids  (see page 199) , endometriosis (formation of cysts 
in the pelvic cavity from bleeding fragments of uterus lining), stress, 
overwork, or approaching menopause  (see below) . The use of 
intrauterine devices can also increase menstrual blood ﬂow .
SELF-HELP  Reduce your intake of tea, coffee, alcohol, milk, and dairy 
products, and eat plenty of raw vegetables. Take 30 minutes of 
moderate exercise every day but avoid overexertion.
CAUTION  If your menstrual cycle is regular but the ﬂow is heavier than 
usual or exhibits some other change, consult a doctor. If you have 
had sexual intercourse regularly and a period is late and heavier than 
usual, see a doctor within 12 hours.
MENOPAUSE
Menopause is the cessation of menstruation that occurs in women 
between the ages of 45 and 55. It should not be considered an 
ailment but rather a fact of physical and emotional life that some 
women adjust to better than others. Symptoms occur as a result  
of diminishing hormone production by the ovaries, and include hot 
ﬂashes, vaginal dryness, aches and pains, dizziness, loss of appetite, 
weariness, chilliness, and palpitations. Psychological symptoms 
include tearfulness, irritability , anxiety , nervousness, depression,  
and insomnia. Menopausal symptoms may be exacerbated by stress. 
Counterbalancing the reduction in hormone production is the basis 
of conventional treatment—hormone replacement therapy ( HRT). 
Homeopathy does not view menopause simply in terms of 
hormones, but adopts a more holistic approach to body imbalances 
that may have existed for a long time. Constitutional treatment   
(see page 176)  may be required.
SELF-HELP  Avoid tea, coffee, alcohol, and spicy foods, and eat little 
and often. Cotton underwear, lightweight clothes, and cool showers 
or baths will reduce the impact of hot ﬂashes. Do moderate exercise 
and practice deep breathing  (see page 217)  or yoga. Ease vaginal 
dryness with calendula ointment, and increase lubrication during 
sexual intercourse with a vaginal lubricant.
CAUTION  If there is any bleeding six months beyond the last period,  
or prolonged spotting between periods, consult a doctor.
BREAST PAIN
General tenderness in the breast is common before a period. 
Localized pain may be due to an abscess or a lump. Abscesses may 
develop from mastitis  (see page 201) , while lumps may be caused by 
ﬁbroadenosis (thickening of breast tissue), benign growths, or cancer.
SELF-HELP  If breast-feeding, bathe the breast in hot water. If breast 
pain has other causes, reduce intake of animal fats, tea, and 
caffeine, and substitute oily ﬁsh for meat and dairy products.
CAUTION  If you are breast-feeding and have breast pain, especially  
if it is accompanied by a fever, see a doctor within 24 hours. If  
the nipple or breast changes, or if a hard, tender area develops,  
see a doctor immediately.• Fluid retention that exacerbates a weight problem
• Possible backache, perspiration, and clumsiness
• Blood is bright red
• Possible abdominal cramps
• Periods are irregular
• Severe abdominal cramps
• Itchy vaginal discharge
• Sweating during menstruation
• Visual disturbances, such as spots or ﬂashes
• Periods are irregular
• Blood ﬂow includes dark clots
• Intermittent bleeding
• Abdominal cramps
• Headache, dizziness, and fainting
• Very pale face
• Headache that is worse on the left side
• Perspiration on the face and back of the neck 
during sleep
• Craving for sweet foods
• Swollen ﬁnger joints
• Sensation as though there is a kettle boiling 
inside the body that is relieved by perspiring
• Headache that is worse on the left side
• Dizziness and fainting
• Hot ﬂushing of the face
• Constricted feeling in the throat and abdomen
• Heavy, irregular periods leading into  
menopause
• Possible candidiasis
• Vaginal dryness causing pain during  
sexual intercourse
• Hot ﬂashes if in a hot room or a room  
full of people
• Tendency to put on weight easily
• Headaches and migraines that are worse  
on the left side
• Craving for sweet foods
• Breast is tender to the slightest touch
• Breast is swollen • Stitchlike pain in the nipple
• Desire to press the breast hard with the hands
• Legs feel heavy
• Possible reduction in sex drive
• Breast is hard and inﬂamed, and feels as 
though there might be an abscess forming
• Discomfort on the slightest movement
• Possible bursting headache
• Great but infrequent thirst
• Possible constipationHeavy periods in 
overweight women
Heavy periods with 
apathy and indifference
Heavy periods with 
nervous excitement
Inability to cope during 
menopause
Menopause with hot 
ﬂashes, perspiration,  
and fainting
Loss of libido during  
menopause
Menopause with 
hot ﬂashes in warm 
conditions
Breast is tender even 
when lightly touched
Breast is hard  
and inﬂamedSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•259 WOMEN’S HEALTH
• Confusion and difﬁculty  
in concentrating
• Anxiety about symptoms having 
been noticed by others
• Fear of insanity
• Tearfulness and irritability
• Indifference even to loved ones
• General apathy
• Irritability
• Oversensitivity
• Fear of domesticated animals
• Mood swings and depression
• Feeling of being unable to cope
• Confusion
• Anxiety about symptoms having 
been noticed by others
• Claustrophobia
• Poor memory
• Difﬁculty in concentrating
• Overexcitement with great 
talkativeness
• Confusion
• Jealousy
• Irritability
• Tearfulness
• Apathy and indifference
• Difﬁculty in concentrating
• Poor memory
• Depression
• Irritability
• Depression
• Confusion
• Mental dullness and fatigue
• Anxiety, hysteria, or sadness 
associated with grief
• Irritability
• Desire to be alone
• Great concern about  
ﬁnancial problems• In the morning
• When slightly constipated
• For eating and sleep
• For exercise
• For applying hot compresses  
to the lower abdomen
• For applying ﬁrm pressure  
to the abdomen
• For loosening clothing
• When bending double
• When lying down
• In dry weather
• After breakfast
• For rubbing the affected joints
• In the open air
• For cold drinks
• For loosening clothing
• For eating
• For sleep
• For cold baths
• For strenuous walking in the  
open air
• For being warm in bed
• In the open air
• For perspiring
• For gentle walking
• For fasting
• For expressing emotion
• With the arms hanging down
• In cool air
• For applying ﬁrm, cold pressure  
to the breast• In drafts
• In cold, damp, windy weather
• For exercise
• Between 2 a.m. and 3 a.m.
• For stress and overexertion
• For cold
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• For mental exertion or stress
• In the early morning and evening
• For touch and jarring
• For noise
• In cold drafts
• For mental exertion
• At night
• In cold, raw air
• For cold baths
• For physical or mental exertion
• For the pressure of clothing
• For sexual intercourse
• Upon waking
• In the summer and in the sun
• For swallowing liquids
• For the pressure of clothing
• For hot drinks or alcohol
• For cold
• For sexual intercourse
• In the early morning and evening
• Before thunderstorms
• For hot baths
• For physical or mental 
overexertion
• For becoming hot in bed
• For drinking alcohol
• When lying down
• For turning over in bed
• For cold
• For the slightest movement
• In the morning and at around  
9 p.m. and 3 a.m.
• In cold, dry, windy weatherCalc. carb.
(see page 77)  
30c 3 times  
daily up to 14 days
Sepia
(see page 112)  
30c 3 times 
daily up to 14 days
China
 (see page 49)  
30c 3 times 
daily up to 14 days
Calc. carb.
(see page 77)  
30c twice 
daily up to 7 days
Lachesis
(see page 109)  
30c twice 
daily up to 7 days
Sepia
(see page 112)  
30c twice 
daily up to 7 days
Sulphur
(see page 99)  
30c twice daily 
up to 7 days
Conium
(see page 51)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 5 days
Bryonia
(see page 42)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 5 daysSYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS

260 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
CYSTITIS
This term is used generally to describe increased frequency  
of urination with pain, but cystitis proper is inﬂammation of the 
bladder due to infection from the bowel. It may be accompanied  
by fever and a burning sensation when urinating. Cystitis mainly 
affects women; the female urethra is short and easily invaded by 
germs. The condition may be exacerbated by stress, antibiotics, 
contraceptives, poor diet, food allergy , poor personal hygiene, 
tights or underwear, and sexual intercourse.
SELF-HELP  Increase the alkalinity of the urine by drinking 10 ﬂ oz 
(300 ml) of cold water every 20 minutes. Avoid tea, coffee, and 
alcohol. Cystitis may be aggravated by some foods, such as 
asparagus, beets, citrus fruits, strawberries, milk, ice cream, spicy 
foods, and junk foods. Never suppress the urge to urinate,  
and be scrupulous about personal hygiene. Avoid using tampons, 
douches, and perfumed bath products. Use lubrication during sexual 
intercourse. Urinate after intercourse.
CAUTION  If there is pain in the kidneys or blood in the urine, or if an 
attack lasts for more than 48 hours, see a doctor.
VAGINAL THRUSH
Thrush is caused by a fungus, Candida albicans . Symptoms include 
itchiness or soreness of the vagina and vulva, discharge, and 
frequent urination. Acidifying, infection-ﬁghting bacteria that  
occur naturally in the vagina can be destroyed by antibiotics, 
contraceptives, vaginal deodorants, and medicated douches. 
Thrush is aggravated by stress, overwork, hormonal imbalance, 
pregnancy , and wearing tight clothes.
SELF-HELP  Avoid all potential irritants. Scrub underwear with unsalted 
detergent before washing it. Use lubrication and condoms during 
sexual intercourse. Allow air to reach the vagina as often as  
possible. Avoid sugar and yeast. Follow antibiotics with an acidophilic 
supplement (such as live yogurt). Douche the vagina three times  
a day with 5 oz (150 g) natural live yogurt diluted in 1½ quarts 
(liters) of boiled, cooled water or a weak solution of fresh lemon  
juice or vinegar (1 tbsp) and water (10 ﬂ oz/300 ml). Acidifying 
preparations are available over the counter.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist, consult a doctor.
VAGINISMUS
This is an unusual condition in which the muscles surrounding  
the entrance of the vagina go into spasm. This makes sexual 
intercourse, medical examination of the vagina, or the use  
of tampons painful or even impossible. The spasms may be 
accompanied by arching of the back and straightening and drawing 
together of the legs. Vaginismus usually occurs in women who are 
anxious about penetration of the vagina as a result of a previous 
medical condition or examination, trauma such as sexual abuse,  
or psychological factors such as fear or guilt associated with  
sexual intercourse.
SELF-HELP  Practice relaxation techniques  (see page 217) , meditation, 
or yoga before any vaginal invasion.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist, consult a doctor for referral to  
a gynaecologist or a psychosexual therapist.• Burning, cutting pains in the lower abdomen
• Constant urge to urinate and a sensation as 
though the bladder cannot be emptied properly
• Only small amounts of urine are passed
• Aching in the small of the back
• Only small amounts of urine are passed 
despite frequent urging
• Chilliness
• Sensation as though a drop of urine is 
constantly trickling through the urethra
• Possible association with surgery to the 
urinary tract or other vaginal invasion, including 
sexual intercourse
• Itching of the vagina and vulva that is worse 
after urination and before menstruation
• Possible vaginal warts
• Possible chronic headache  
or increased appetite
• Itching of the vagina and vulva
• White, offensive-smelling discharge that is 
worse after sexual intercourse
• Soreness and burning in the vagina
• Possible ulceration of the labia
• Itching in the rectum and around the anus
• Offensive-smelling, yellow or white  
vaginal discharge
• Vaginal pain during sexual intercourse
• Alternating constipation and diarrhea
• Flatulence
• Oversensitivity of the vagina and vulva
• Increased sexual desire despite symptoms
• Possible retention of urine
• Constipation that is accompanied by colicky 
abdominal pains
• Extreme sensitivity of the vagina and vulva
• Possible irritation of the bladder
• Vaginismus is spasmodic and erratic
• Itching of the vulva that extends into the vagina
• Possible association with a lump in the throatCystitis with cutting, 
burning pains
Cystitis with irritability
Cystitis with a feeling  
of resentment
Thrush with itching in the 
vulva that is worse before 
menstruation
Thrush with discharge 
that is worse after  
sexual intercourse
Thrush with itching  
in the rectum
Extreme sensitivity of the 
vagina and the vulva
Vaginismus after medical 
examination
Vaginismus secondary 
to griefSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•261 WOMEN’S HEALTH
• Anger or extreme irritability
• Possible fear of mirrors and 
other reﬂective surfaces
• Irritability
• Great criticism of others
• Desire to be left alone
• Resentment
• Anger
• Anxiety, especially that brought 
on by overwork and stress
• Depression
• Tearfulness
• Irritability
• Indifference toward loved ones
• Aversion to sexual intercourse
• Stress
• Obstinacy and irritability
• Anxiety and hypochondria
• Selﬁshness and self-indulgence
• Loss of memory and slow 
perception
• Tendency to malinger
• Resentment and  
suppressed anger
• Association with grief, 
introspection, and the 
suppression of emotions• For warmth
• For gentle massage
• At night and in the morning
• For warmth
• For sleep
• For applying pressure  
to the bladder
• For washing
• In the evening
• For warmth
• For a good night’s sleep
• In the morning
• When slightly constipated
• For eating
• For sleep
• For exercise
• For applying heat to the vulva
• In fresh air
• For dry warmth
• For walking
• For massaging the vagina
• For applying ﬁrm pressure to the 
muscles at the tops of the thighs
• For stretching the legs
• For warmth
• For rest
• For applying ﬁrm pressure to the 
muscles at the tops of the thighs
• For changing position
• For warmth
• For urinating• For movement
• For drinking coffee or cold water
• In the afternoon
• In cold, windy weather
• For noise
• For eating, especially spicy foods
• For taking stimulants
• Between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m.
• For applying pressure  
to the bladder
• For not drinking enough ﬂuids
• Before and after menstruation
• For applying heat to the vulva
• During pregnancy
• In cold, damp, windy weather
• For physical or mental exertion
• For cold
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• For being overtired
• Between 2 a.m. and 3 a.m., and 
in the early morning and evening
• For prolonged standing
• For wearing too much clothing
• For cold and damp
• For washing
• For being too warm in bed
• For alcohol
• For exertion
• For being in company
• For excitement
• For emotional stress  
or quarreling
• For sexual excess  
or masturbation
• For operative investigation
• For emotional stress
• For consolation
• For the slightest touchCantharis
(see page 105)  
30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses
Nux vomica
(see page 63)  
6c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses
Staphisagria
(see page 54)  
30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses
Calc. carb.
(see page 77)  
6c 6 times daily 
up to 5 days
Sepia
(see page 112)  
6c 6 times daily 
up to 5 days
Sulphur
(see page 99)  
6c 6 times daily 
up to 5 days
Plumbum met.
(see page 96)  
30c twice daily 
up to 5 days
Staphisagria
(see page 54)  
30c twice daily 
up to 5 days
Ignatia
(see page 75)   
30c twice daily  
up to 5 daysPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

262 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
MORNING SICKNESS
Nausea and vomiting are fairly common during pregnancy , 
especially a ﬁrst pregnancy . It is thought that changing hormone 
levels during pregnancy activate the vomiting center in the brain. 
Women often experience nausea and vomiting during the second 
and third months of pregnancy , although not necessarily only in 
the mornings. Symptoms usually wear off by about 14 to 16 
weeks, although a few women vomit excessively (hyperemesis), 
which can cause dehydration and chemical imbalances  
in the body . This condition may , in the worst cases,  
require hospitalization.
SELF-HELP  Eat small, frequent meals and avoid fatty foods. If there  
is sickness immediately upon waking, eat a cracker before getting 
out of bed. The use of fresh ginger in cooking may also help. An 
acupressure band, available from drugstores, worn around the wrist 
may also be effective. Get plenty of rest.
CAUTION  If you are vomiting after most meals, consult a doctor.
LABOR PAINS
Pain is experienced in childbirth as result of contractions of the 
uterus that move the baby down the birth canal during labor. For 
most women labor is a painful business; for some it is excruciating. 
This may be because they have great sensitivity to pain or because 
the fetus is positioned in such a way that the uterus has to work 
harder than is usual in order to push the baby out. Labor pains 
may be exacerbated by exhaustion, fear, anxiety , and sometimes 
anger. Homeopathic treatment aims to calm the emotions as well as 
to relieve pain and exhaustion.
SELF-HELP  Learn psycho-prophylactic techniques (preventative 
measures that combine positive thinking and constructive breathing) 
at prenatal classes. These may help you to restore a feeling of 
control in what can be a frightening situation. If you are extremely 
sensitive to pain, learn other relaxation techniques and consider 
acupuncture or hypnotherapy.
BREAST-FEEDING PROBLEMS
Several problems may arise during breast-feeding. The breasts may 
be too full for the baby to be able to latch on to a nipple properly . 
Expressing milk before a feeding may solve this problem. The milk 
may be too watery or have a taste that the baby does not like. This 
may be due to the mother’s insubstantial diet, anxiety , exhaustion, 
or to strong-tasting foods that she has eaten. Pain as the baby 
suckles may be due to inﬂammation of the breast tissue  (see 
Mastitis , page 201) , an abscess, or cracked nipples.
SELF-HELP  Bathe sore and cracked nipples after each feed with  
a solution of calendula and hypericum (10 drops of mother tinctures 
to 10 ﬂ oz/300 ml boiled, cooled water). Do not use soap. Clean  
and dry the nipples thoroughly and apply hypericum or calendula 
ointment. Leave them exposed to the air regularly. Wear breast 
shields during pregnancy to draw out inverted nipples.
CAUTION  If there is engorgement or hardness, breast pain, fever, and 
tender glands under the arms, see a doctor within 12 hours.• Nausea that is worse in the morning
• Vomiting of small amounts of food with mucus
• Retching spasms
• Dry mouth and thickly coated tongue
• Craving for fresh, fatty, spicy, or acidic foods and 
aversion to bread, meat, coffee, and tobacco
• Nausea that is worse during the early evening 
but wears off during the night
• Dry mouth but lack of thirst
• Digestion is upset by rich, fatty foods
• Pressure under the breastbone after meals
• Craving for sweet foods
• Nausea is not relieved by vomiting
• Tongue feels clean rather than coated
• Profuse saliva
• Lack of thirst
• Possible fainting
• Contractions that seem so painful they cause 
involuntary screaming and crying
• Ineffectual contractions
• Pain extending into the rectum with a frequent 
urge to pass gas, urine, or stools
• Pain that causes spasms of the cervix, which 
does not dilate properly
• Labor progresses slowly
• Chilliness
• Engorgement or hardness of the breasts with 
red streaks on the skin
• Breasts feel heavy
• Hot, dry skin
• Possible mastitis or breast abscess
• Inﬂamed nipples that are very tender to the touch
• Great pain as the baby suckles
• Milk is of poor quality
• Baby has difﬁculty latching on to a nipple
• Breasts are so full that they cause  
great discomfort
• Possible chilliness or perspiration, especially  
if the mother is overweightNausea with a thickly 
coated tongue
Nausea that is worse  
in the evening
Constant nausea with  
a clean tongue
Labor pains with 
oversensitivity to pain
Labor pains with  
great irritability
Labor pains with  
a constant need for 
comfort and sympathy
Throbbing, inﬂamed 
breasts
Pain when the baby 
suckles, causing anger  
in the mother
Engorged breastsSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•263 WOMEN’S HEALTH
• Irritability that is worse in  
the morning
• Overcriticism of others
• Tearfulness
• Great desire for support  
and reassurance
• Self-pity
• Irritability and contempt
• Great desire for something but  
it is not known exactly what
• Nervousness and restlessness 
between contractions
• Tearfulness and despair
• Irritability
• Impatience
• Great criticism of others
• Restlessness
• Tendency to cry at the  
least provocation
• Great need for comfort and 
reassurance
• Possible delirium with wide, 
staring eyes if temperature  
is very high
• Anger
• Spitefulness and rudeness
• Great tendency to complain
• Worry about new responsibilities
• Anxiety causing forgetfulness 
and apprehension
• Anxiety about symptoms having 
been observed• For warmth 
• For applying ﬁrm pressure  
to the stomach
• For washing or applying wet 
compresses to the stomach
• In the evening
• For cold drinks or applying cold 
compresses to the stomach
• For sympathy and crying
• With the hands above the head
• For gentle exercise
• In fresh air
• In fresh air
• For warmth
• When lying down
• For sucking ice
• For warmth
• For applying ﬁrm pressure or wet 
compresses to the abdomen
• In the evening
• For being left alone
• For crying and sympathy
• With the hands above the head
• For gentle movement
• In fresh air
• For applying cold compresses  
to the abdomen
• When standing or sitting upright
• In warm rooms
• For applying warm compresses  
to the breasts
• For applying cold compresses  
to the breasts
• For perspiring
• When lying down
• For massaging the breasts
• After breakfast• In cold, windy weather
• For spicy foods
• For taking stimulants
• For stress
• Between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m.
• In hot, stuffy rooms
• In the evening
• For rich, fatty foods
• When lying on the left side
• For bending forward
• For movement • For warmth
• When lying down
• For stress caused  
by embarrassment
• For emotional excitement
• For strong smells and noise
• In fresh air
• For cold
• At night
• For cold
• For noise
• For taking stimulants
• For eating
• For stress
• For heat
• In extremes of temperature
• When lying on the painful side
• In the evening and at night
• For jarring, noise, or movement
• For applying pressure to  
the breasts
• When lying down, especially  
on the right side
• For heat
• At night
• For drinking milk
• For physical or mental exertion
• For climbing stairs
• In cold rooms
• For bathingNux vomica
(see page 63)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 3 days
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 3 days
Ipecac.
(see page 45)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 3 days
Coffea
(see page 50)  
30c every 5 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Nux vomica
(see page 63)  
30c every 5 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Pulsatilla
(see page 61)  
30c every 5 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Belladonna
(see page 39)  
30c hourly 
up to 10 doses
Chamomilla
(see page 46)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 6 doses
Calc. carb.
(see page 77)  
30c 4 times daily 
up to 3 daysPSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

264 •
MEN’S HEALTH
Medically speaking, men are less complicated than women. 
The most troublesome of their problems that are suitable for 
self-help are usually the result of infections. The urethra in 
the male is much longer than that in the female, and therefore tends to be less susceptible to invasion by germs. 
Men thus experience fewer problems with urinary control 
and infection than women. However, because the urethra  
is connected to the testes, epididymes, and prostate gland, HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Problems with erection may result from physical causes, for 
example injury or surgery to the genitals or spine; from chronic 
illnesses such as diabetes; from nervous disorders; or from taking 
drugs, either medically prescribed or recreational, or alcohol. 
Erectile dysfunction may also occur because of tiredness, or a lack 
of appropriate stimulation. Most physical problems occur because 
there is an insufﬁcient supply of blood to the penis. The stresses  
of modern life or anxiety about sexual intercourse may further 
inhibit the ability to initiate or sustain an erection.
SELF-HELP  To reduce the psychological problems that may accompany 
erectile dysfunction, try to maintain a relaxed state of mind when 
making love. Forget about penetrative sexual intercourse for a while 
and concentrate on giving and receiving pleasure in areas of the body 
other than the genitals.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist, see a doctor.
HYDROCELE
A soft, painless swelling of the scrotum, hydrocele is due to  
a build-up of excess ﬂuid in the sheath surrounding the testes.  
It may be precipitated by injury , and is common in older men, 
although in most cases the cause is unknown. The condition  
may be congenital. The swelling may be caused by inﬂammation, 
infection, or, very occasionally , a tumor. Usually hydrocele is  
just monitored, but ﬂuid may need to be drained off should the 
swelling become too great.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist beyond a month, see a doctor.
BALANITIS
This swelling and soreness of the foreskin may result from the 
friction of underwear, or from irritation caused by condoms or 
contraceptive creams. It may be associated with herpes or diabetes.
SELF-HELP  Bathe the foreskin and head of the penis (glans) in  
a solution of hypericum and calendula  (see page 271)  every  
four hours, then apply calendula ointment.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist for ﬁve days, see a doctor.
THRUSH
Often transmitted from an infected partner, this fungal infection 
albicans  yeast grows under the foreskin, causing inﬂammation.
SELF-HELP  Bathe the penis in a solution of hypericum and calendula  
(see page 271)  four times daily. Apply calendula ointment.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist beyond 14 days, see a doctor.  
Make sure that your partner also goes for treatment.• Penis remains cold and small
• Possible premature ejaculation if erection  
does occur
• Great desire for sweet foods
• Penis is bruised as a result of injury
• Penis feels sore and tender to the touch
• Possible premature ejaculation if erection  
does occur
• Erection is not ﬁrm enough for penetration
• General weakness and nervous exhaustion
• Penis remains cold and small
• Possible premature ejaculation if erection  
does occur
• Bruising with painful swelling of the scrotum 
and testicle
• Swelling may be ﬁlled with blood
• Testicle aches during thundery weather
• Association with orchitis (inﬂammation  
of a testicle)
• Right testicle is the one usually affected
• Inner surface of the foreskin is irritated  
and inﬂamed
• Possible itching
• Possible discharge of offensive-smelling pus
• Possible ulceration
• Inner surface of the foreskin is inﬂamed  
and itchy
• Head of the penis is red, with a raised rash 
that is itchy
• Possible itchy, smelly discharge from the penisErectile dysfunction in 
anticipation of failure
Erectile dysfunction 
caused by bruising
Erectile dysfunction 
caused by sexual excess
Hydrocele following injury
Hydrocele with an  
aching testicle
Balanitis with 
inﬂammation of the 
foreskin and glans
Thrush with inﬂammation 
and dischargeSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•265 MEN’S HEALTH
• High sex drive but lack of  
self-conﬁdence and expectation 
of failure to achieve or sustain  
an erection
• Desire to be left alone
• Denial that there is a problem
• Refusal to get medical help
• Fear of being touched
• Anxiety about health
• Fear of death
• Increase in sexual thoughts 
despite decline in sexual 
function
• Desire to be left alone
• Denial that there is a problem
• Refusal to get medical help
• Nervousness
• Fear of thunderstorms and 
great sensitivity to approaching 
storms
• Restlessness at night
• Loss of willpower
• Indifference
• Suspicion
• Restlessness at night
• Loss of willpower
• Indifference
• Suspicion• For loosening clothing
• For warm drinks
• For urinating
• For bathing in cold water
• For adopting a sexual position 
that avoids putting pressure on 
the bruised area
• For applying ﬁrm pressure  
to the penis
• For rest
• For ejaculating
• For bathing in cold water
• For adopting a sexual position 
that avoids putting pressure on 
the bruised area
• For heat
• For continuous movement
• For lying in bed with the legs 
pulled up to the chest
• In moderate temperatures
• For rest
• For scratching the affected area
• In the morning
• In moderate temperatures
• For rest
• For scratching the affected area
• In the morning• For wearing tight clothing
• In very hot rooms
• For overeating
• For touch
• For further injury or bruising
• For sexual excesses
• For touch
• For sprain or injury
• For sexual excesses
• For touch
• For movement
• For lying for too long on one side
• Before thunderstorms
• In windy weather
• For rest, standing, and upon 
starting to move
• At night
• For perspiring
• For overheating
• In cold air and drafts
• At night
• For perspiring
• For getting overheated or too cold
• For urinatingLycopodium
(see page 59)  
30c twice daily 
up to 5 days
Arnica
(see page 37)  
30c twice daily  
up to 5 days
Agnus castus
(see page 173)  
30c twice daily 
up to 5 days
Arnica
(see page 37)  
30c 3 times daily 
up to 3 weeks
Rhododendron
(see page 162)  
6c 3 times daily 
up to 3 weeks
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 5 days
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 daysany kidney , bladder, or urethral infection can spread easily  
to the reproductive system  (see page 198) . Disorders of that 
system are the subject of this section. Men’s sexual activity 
can be extended into later life by following a lifestyle that 
promotes general good health, including a balanced diet, 
sufficient exercise, and effective stress control. Men may  be reluctant to seek medical help for their ailments, especially 
those concerning the reproductive system. Many conditions 
are, however, easily treated if diagnosed early , and respond 
well to homeopathy . Neglect, on the other hand, can lead  
to complications that threaten fertility , sexual function,  
or even life.
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

266 •
HEALTH IN LATER LIFE
As people get older, they appreciate that health is something 
more than just the good fortune to have a body in proper 
working order. Maintaining health into later life has to do 
with genetic makeup, how a person has lived life so far, their current lifestyle, and their relationships with family , friends, 
and with the community , on whom they may increasingly 
depend if health deteriorates and energy levels fall. Health 
and well-being in later life can be planned for,  HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
DIZZINESS
In later life, dizziness is commonly due to postural hypotension 
(low blood pressure on standing or sitting) or drugs. It may be 
exacerbated by osteoarthritis  (see page 196) . More seriously , 
dizziness may be indicative of Parkinson’s disease (degeneration  
of nerve centers coordinating movement), cervical spondylosis 
(bony outgrowths on neck vertebrae restricting blood supply to  
the brain), or arteriosclerosis (hardening and narrowing of arteries, 
especially those supplying the brain). These conditions affect 
balance. Mild, early symptoms may respond to self-help remedies.
SELF-HELP  Stay physically active and maintain a good diet. Minimize 
the risk of falls in the home by, for example, securing ﬂoor coverings 
and ﬁtting handrails on stairs.
CAUTION  If there is no improvement within two weeks, see a doctor.  
If dizziness increases rapidly, see a doctor within 24 hours. If 
dizziness causes a fall, see a doctor within two hours.
CONFUSION
Confusion is characterized by an inability to organize thoughts 
coherently and poor short-term memory . Elderly people are prone 
to confusion resulting from infection, alcohol, or drugs. Chronic 
confusion may be due to dementia  (see below) . Sudden onset may 
indicate a serious condition, such as hypothermia (fall in body 
temperature to less than 95°F/35°C), a stroke  (see page 187) , a brain 
tumor, or hypoglycemia (abnormally low blood-sugar levels).
SELF-HELP  Make sure that the diet is balanced. Try using the 
breathing techniques used in yoga to reduce stress.
CAUTION  If there is no improvement within three weeks, see a  
doctor. If there is acute confusion, see a doctor within 12 hours.
SENILE DEMENTIA
A general decline in mental ability is caused by the progressive loss  
of function of brain cells. This occurs if arteries supplying blood  
to the brain become blocked, or as a result of a number of conditions, 
including Alzheimer’s disease and stroke  (see page 187) . One of the ﬁrst 
symptoms is a deterioration in short-term memory so that it becomes 
increasingly difﬁcult to follow conversations or to read. As the 
condition progresses, there is a gradual loss of interest in previously 
enjoyed pursuits, as well as mood swings. There may be a loss of social 
or sexual inhibitions. Diagnosis needs care, since a deteriorating 
mental state may be due to a variety of medical conditions, dietar y 
deﬁciencies, the use of alcohol or drugs, or depression.
SELF-HELP  The diet should be balanced between proteins and 
carbohydrates, and include plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist beyond a month, see a doctor.• Dizziness on standing up from a sitting  
or lying position
• Dizziness better for lying down
• Head movement creates a sensation  
as though everything is turning with it
• Dizziness is worse for movement and  
is associated with nausea
• Oversensitivity to noise that makes the 
dizziness worse • Chilliness
• Dizziness with a tendency to fall forward  
and sideways
• Sensation as though the head  
is being compressed
• General slowing down of physical activity  
so that tasks take a long time to complete
• Weakness after eating
• Tendency to lose weight even when eating well
• Weakness when walking
• Noises in the head that resemble explosions
• Spasms in the neck or the bladder  
when urinating
• Sensation as though the head is separated 
from the body
• Weakness and fatigue
• Possible early stages of an enlarged prostate 
gland in men
• Slowing down of all movements
• Craving for sweet foods
• Susceptibility to digestive problems such as 
bloating, excessive ﬂatulence, and constipation
• Fullness after eating only small amounts  
of food
• Generally thin and withered appearance
• Numbness and tingling in the ﬁngers and toes
• Burning pains, especially in the stomach
• Desire for salt and ice-cold drinksDizziness after a fall  
or injury
Dizziness with nausea
Dizziness that is worse  
in cold weather
Confusion with suspicion
Confusion with delusions
Senile dementia in 
people who were once 
intellectually sharp
Senile dementia  
with suspicion
Senile dementia in highly- 
strung peopleSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•267 HEALTH IN LATER LIFE
• Denial that there is a problem
• Desire to be left alone
• Refusal to get medical help
• Nervousness • Nervous 
exhaustion after long suffering
• Concern that time is passing  
too quickly
• Association with a deep sense 
of grief
• Failing memory necessitating the 
double-checking of everything
• Tasks are carried out thoughtlessly
• Lack of conﬁdence and  
a concern about being mocked
• Suspicion of strangers and 
unfamiliar places
• Overexcitement and heightened 
awareness of sensations
• Possible out-of-body experiences
• Fear of the dark and of demons
• Laughter at anything
• Forgetfulness
• Lack of conﬁdence as memory 
and concentration begin to fail
• Fear of being alone
• Failing memory leading to odd 
actions, thoughts, and perceptions
• Suspicion that everyone is 
mocking, leading to a lack of self-
conﬁdence and desire to be alone
• Agitation and apprehension
• Fear of the dark and being alone
• Failing memory leading to 
constant worry about others• For lying down, especially with the 
head lower than the body
• In the open air
• For bathing in cold water
• For sitting up straight
• For rest
• For drinking warm water
• For cold drinks
• For gentle movement
• For warmth
• For walking in the open air
• For being alone
• In the open air
• For bathing in cold water
• For rest
• For warm drinks
• For loosening clothing
• In the open air
• For walking in the open air
• For being alone
• For wrapping up warmly
• For sleep, even catnaps
• For massage
• For eating• For injury
• For touch
• For sleep
• For getting up
• For noise
• For touch
• With the eyes closed
• For the slightest movement
• In dry, cold wind
• For stooping
• For being in company
• For cold
• After meals
• In the dark
• For physical or mental exertion
• For coffee
• For the pressure of clothing
• For warmth
• Between 4 p.m. and 8 p.m.
• For overeating
• For being in company
• For cold
• For stress
• When lying down
• For emotional stress
• For warm foods
• For mental exertionArnica
(see page 37)  
6c every 8 hours 
up to 14 days
Theridion
(see page 169)  
6c every 8 hours 
up to 14 days
Causticum
(see page 79)  
6c every 8 hours 
up to 14 days
Baryta carb.
(see page 76)  
6c twice daily 
up to 3 weeks
Cannabis ind.
(see page 43)  
6c twice daily 
up to 3 weeks
Lycopodium
(see page 59)  
30c twice daily 
up to 14 days
Baryta carb.
(see page 76)  
30c twice daily 
up to 14 days
Phosphorous
(see page 94)  
30c twice daily 
up to 14 daysas with any foreseeable situation, and the better the plan,  
the easier life will be. Bodily systems may ultimately fail 
because of inherited weaknesses, but to what extent they fail 
and how quickly they do so will also depend on nutrition, 
level of exercise, lifestyle, and attitudes to life. Constitutional 
homeopathic treatment  (see page 176)  aims to establish  a holistic approach to correcting imbalances in body  
systems, and maintaining a sense of vitality and well-being 
in a person as they get older. Homeopathic remedies are 
particularly well suited to aging bodies that may be less  
able than young ones to metabolize conventional drugs  
with speed and efficiency .
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS SYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE

268 •HOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
NEURALGIA
Nerve pain may occur anywhere in the body but is most commonly 
associated with nerves providing sensation to the face, mouth, 
nose, upper eyelids, sinuses, and scalp. Neuralgia consists of  
a severe, shooting pain on one side of the face that lasts for seconds 
or minutes. The pain may be linked to infection of the sinuses, 
ears, or teeth, but often the cause is unknown. It may be referred 
pain, which is felt in a different area from the location of infection, 
for example, but in an area that is served by a different branch of 
the same nerve. Nerves are very sensitive, and neuralgia can be 
triggered by touch, pressure, chewing, or drafts. It is common in 
people over 70, in whom it may result from nerve damage.
SELF-HELP  Hold a covered hot-water bottle against the affected area. 
Try breathing techniques  (see page 217)  to relax the muscles and 
hence relieve pressure on the nerves.
CAUTION  If there is no improvement within two weeks,  
consult a doctor.
SKIN PROBLEMS
With age, the skin loses elasticity and plumpness. It becomes thin, 
and tiny blood vessels that are nearer the surface as a result are 
easily damaged. This causes bruising and discoloration, which 
commonly occur on the backs of the hands, forearms, and lower 
legs. The discoloration fades but never disappears. The skin may 
develop pigmented patches, possibly due to faulty fat metabolism. 
Itchy skin is common with age, and is often due to dryness, eczema  
(see page 240) , or dermatitis (inﬂammation of the skin).
SELF-HELP  Extra vitamin C and the application of arnica ointment may 
lessen bruising, while extra vitamin E may help to reduce the impact 
of pigmented patches.
CAUTION  If a pigmented patch that is more than 1/3 in (1 cm) in 
diameter becomes larger, inﬂamed, or encrusted, develops an 
irregular, notched outline or a dark area within it, or itches, oozes,  
or bleeds, consult a doctor.
INCONTINENCE & FREQUENT 
URINATION
Incontinence is not an inevitable feature of aging, and is often 
secondary to a urinary infection such as cystitis, constipation,  
an enlarged prostate or irritation of the vulva, or the use of drugs. 
It can also occur after a stroke or problems with the spinal cord. 
Stress incontinence—a leakage of urine when laughing, coughing, 
or sneezing as a result of weak pelvic ﬂoor muscles—is chieﬂy  
a women’s complaint. Associated with advanced senile dementia  
(see page 266) , incontinence may be more a question of attitude 
than physical disability . It is often worse for cold, overexcitement, 
or anxiety . The most common causes of frequent urination are 
diuretic drugs prescribed for high blood pressure, and drinking  
tea, coffee, or alcohol.
SELF-HELP  Avoid drinking large amounts, and pass urine regularly. 
Yoga or osteopathy may help to relax or reposition muscles in the 
lower spinal area. Exercises for the pelvic ﬂoor muscles will 
strengthen them.
CAUTION  If symptoms persist for more than three days, or if frequent 
urination is associated with great thirst, see a doctor.• Intense, shooting pains
• Tearing pain above the left ear, then the right
• Numbness of outer ear and reduced hearing 
ﬁrst on the left side, then on the right
• Sensation of pressure on the top of the head
• Possible shivers up the back and left side
• Burning pains in the head
• Restlessness
• Exhaustion
• Violent, tearing pain on the left side
• Twitching facial muscles on the left side
• Dark red cheek
• Possible redness and watering of the left eye
• Painfully stiff shoulders and neck
• Dry, scaly, itchy skin
• Burning pains after scratching and washing the 
affected areas
• Diarrhea in the morning
• Skin eruption with great itching that induces 
scratching until the skin is raw
• Oily, dirty-looking skin
• Possible distinctive, unpleasant body odor
• Profuse, offensive-smelling perspiration
• Skin is oily and constantly moist
• Intolerable itching
• Stress incontinence
• Frequent urination during ﬁrst stage of sleep
• Frequent urination due to overdistention of the 
bladder following urine retention
• Only small amounts of urine are passed due to 
paralysis of muscles in the neck of the bladder
• Strongest urge to urinate is at around 4 a.m.
• Possible difﬁculty in starting a stream of urine
• Possible pain in the small of the back
• Frequent urge to urinate or to pass stools  
if constipated
• Possible ineffectual urge to urinate
• Sensation as though there is more urine  
to pass even immediately after urination
• Possible cramps in the bladder
• ChillinessNeuralgia in the ear
Neuralgia with  
burning pains
Neuralgia on the left side 
of the face
Itchy skin that is worse 
for washing
Dirty-looking skin
Oily skin with excessive 
perspiration
Frequent urination day 
and night
Frequent urination that is 
worse at 4 a.m.
Frequent urination with 
constipationSPECIFIC AILMENT PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS DISORDER

•269 HEALTH IN LATER LIFE
• Irritability
• Despondency
• Great anxiety
• Fear that recovery is unlikely and 
that death is a possibility
• Fear of cancer
• Fear of pointed objects
• Possible association with  
long-term grief
• Nervous agitation
• Impatience
• Bad temper
• Lack of interest in personal 
appearance
• Fear that recovery is unlikely
• Feeling of having been forsaken
• Possible suicidal tendency
• Loss of memory and willpower
• Nervous confusion and  
a tendency to stutter
• Possible association with  
long-term grief
• Failing memory necessitates the 
double-checking of everything
• Sympathy for others’ suffering
• Irritability
• Anxiety and fear when left alone
• Oversensitivity to noise
• Irritability
• Tendency to be quarrelsome, 
ﬁnd fault with others, and  
blame others
• Oversensitivity to noise and light• For taking deep breaths
• On rising from a sitting position
• For movement
• For applying cold compresses  
to the affected area • In cold air
• For lying in a semi-reclined 
position • For heat
• For applying cold compresses  
to the affected area
• For rest
• For applying pressure to the 
affected area
• For cold
• For applying cold compresses  
to the affected area
• When lying down
• For eating
• For profuse perspiration
• For being neither too hot nor  
too cold
• For rest
• For scratching the affected area
• For cold drinks
• For washing
• For being warm in bed
• For warmth
• For movement
• When sitting with the elbows  
on the knees
• For rest
• For passing stools or gas
• For warmth• In drafts
• For changes in temperature
• Twice a day at the same times
• For touch, talking, sneezing,  
or biting hard
• For stooping or walking
• Between midnight and 2 a.m.
• For physical or mental exertion
• For cold drinks
• For touch or jarring
• For stooping or turning the eyes
• For movement
• On exposure to tobacco smoke
• For sexual intercourse
• For washing
• When warm in bed
• For wearing woolen clothing
• For cold
• For coffee
• For washing
• At night
• For perspiring
• For becoming overheated
• In drafts or cold conditions
• In dry, cold, raw winds  
and drafts
• At 3 a.m., 4 a.m., or in  
the evening
• In cold air and drafts
• In winter
• For coffee
• In the early morning
• For stress and overindulgence
• For being angry
• For noise, light, and touchVerbascum
(see page 171)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Arsen. alb.
(see page 68)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Spigelia
(see page 167)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Sulphur
(see page 99)  6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Psorinum
(see page 111)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Merc. sol.
(see page 85)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Causticum
(see page 79)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 3 days
Kali. carb.
(see page 88)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 3 days
Nux vomica
(see page 63)  
6c every 4 hours 
up to 3 daysSYMPTOMS BETTER SYMPTOMS WORSE REMEDY & DOSAGE PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMPTOMS

270 •
FIRST AIDHOMEOPATHIC SELF-HELP
The most important things to do in an 
emergency are to keep a clear head and not to 
panic, to determine what the priorities are, and 
to act decisively and promptly . Ideally , at least 
one person in every household should be 
trained in first-aid procedures. Only once the 
priorities listed below have been identified 
should homeopathic remedies be given.
Assessing serious conditions
Make sure that you, the victim, and your 
surroundings are safe. Very gently shake the 
victim by both shoulders—without moving 
the neck in case of head or neck injuries—
and ask a question or give a command. If 
there is no response, proceed with the  
ABC of resuscitation.
A–airway Make sure that the victim’s airway 
is open by gently tilting the head back (see 
right) .
B–breathing See if the chest is rising and 
falling, and listen and feel for breathing 
against your ear. If the person is not 
breathing, call 911 immediately . Begin  
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation if you have 
been trained to do so.
C–circulation Look for signs of circulation 
such as breathing, coughing, or movement. 
Do this quickly and for no longer than 
10 seconds. If there is neither circulation  
nor breathing, administer cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR), but only if you  
have been trained in the correct first-  
aid methods.Unconsciousness
If a victim is unconscious, and you have 
already checked their airway , breathing, and 
circulation  (see Assessing serious conditions,   
left) and you do not suspect serious head  
or spinal injuries, carefully maneuver them 
into a safe position  (see right)  and call the 
emergency services. Do not leave an 
unconscious person unattended. Check  
their airway , breathing, and pulse every five 
minutes. Make sure that they are  
kept warm, but that they do not  
become overheated.
Bach Rescue Remedy.  Drip 2 drops  
into the victim’s mouth every  
10 minutes until help arrives.
Bleeding
Check any open wounds to see if there is 
bleeding. If there is, apply a sterile pad and, if 
possible, a bandage. If there is a profuse flow 
of blood from the wound, call the emergency 
services. Place a sterile  
pad over the wound  and apply firm pressure to the area until the 
bleeding stops or medical help arrives.
Arnica 30c  every 10 minutes until the shock of 
injury wears off or until medical help arrives, 
then every 8 hours for up to 4 days.
Burns
Cool all small burns in cold water for up to 
10 minutes, then cover with plastic wrap or a 
burn dressing. If neither is available, use a non-
fluffy , clean dressing. If burns extend over an 
area larger than the palm of a hand, call the 
emergency services and carefully cover the 
affected parts with plastic wrap. Do not attempt 
to remove any pieces of clothing that may have 
adhered to burned skin. Do not burst blisters or 
apply lotion, cream, or gel to the wounds. If the 
victim is conscious, administer sips of water to 
minimize fluid loss.
Arnica 30c  3 doses only, then Cantharis 30c  
up to 6 doses or, if the burn continues to 
sting, Urtica urens 6c  up to 6 doses.
Fractures
Evidence of a fracture includes pain, an 
inability to move the affected part, visible 
deformity , swelling, bruising, and shock. Try Identifying priorities in an emergencyThe aims of first aid are to save life, limit injury , ease pain and 
anxiety , and summon the most appropriate help available. All 
first-aid methods, whether they are associated with conventional 
medicine or complementary therapies, are based on a common-sense approach to dealing with a serious accident or a minor 
scrape. Homeopathic remedies can help to relieve pain, to allay 
anxiety and fear, and to facilitate healing. They can be used in 
conjunction with any other medication.
A SAFE POSITION
Carefully place an unconscious casualty  
in the position below. This will ensure that 
the body will be propped in a stable 
position. The head is slightly lower than  
the body, reducing the risks of vomit  
being inhaled (since liquids can drain  
from the mouth) or the tongue  
being swallowed.
Leg prevents casualty 
from rolling onto front, 
inhibiting breathingHead tilted 
back to keep 
airway open
OPENING THE AIRWAY Gently tilt back the  
forehead and lift the jaw. Pick out any obvious 
obstructions in the mouth.

•271 FIRST AID
ASSEMBLING A FIRST-AID KITto immobilize the affected part to prevent 
further damage and blood loss. Bandage an 
arm against the chest or one leg to the other, 
for example. Pad out the bandages above  
and below the fracture so that clothes and 
blankets do not exert pressure on it. If the 
fracture is open, apply padding to each side 
of the bone, then cover the whole area with a 
sterile dressing. Apply pressure to the 
padding to help slow the bleeding. Call the 
emergency services or take the victim to 
hospital if the injury affects the upper limb.
Arnica 30c  every 10 minutes until the shock of 
injury wears off, then every 8 hours up to 4 
days. Symphytum 6c  taken subsequently every 
8 hours up to 3 weeks will promote healing of 
the bone.
Choking
The airway may be obstructed by food, the 
tongue, vomit, or a foreign object, causing 
coughing, crying, and breathing difficulties. 
Check the mouth and remove any obvious 
obstruction. Encourage the victim to cough. 
If the victim cannot cough, breathe, or speak, 
stand behind him and wrap your arms 
around his waist, under his breastbone. Make 
a fist with one hand and hold it in your other 
hand, Pull sharply upward and inward five 
times. Repeat the slaps and pulls three times  
and then call 911. If the victim stops 
breathing, be prepared to do 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR).
Aconite 30c  every 10 minutes until the shock 
of this traumatic event wears off.
Drowning
The priorities for a victim of drowning are to 
call 911 and then start basic life support  (see 
Assessing serious conditions,  opposite) .
Electric shock
If someone has suffered an electric shock, turn 
off the circuit breaker or use a broom handle 
or dry clothing to separate the victim from the 
power source. Keep them away from water, 
which conducts electricity . Call 911 and start 
basic life support  (see Assessing serious 
conditions,  opposite) . Look for any wounds. 
Lay a conscious person on their back, raise the 
legs slightly , and tilt the head to one side with 
the chin up. Place an unconscious victim in a 
safe position  (see opposite) , and cover them.
Aconite 30c  every minute up to 10 doses if 
the victim is fearful or restless. If they are 
yawning, desperate for air, or turning blue, 
Carbo veg. 30c  every minute up to 10 doses.Many homeopathic pharmacies sell basic 
homeopathic ﬁrst-aid kits containing 
between 12 and 18 remedies. These 
represent a good start, but check the 
contents before buying one to ensure that it 
includes the remedies that you need  (see 
below) . You may be able to exchange some 
remedies for others. For acute ﬁrst-aid 
complaints, you will need remedies with a 
30c potency; for less acute ailments, 6c 
potency. (Pregnant women should not take 
Apis of lower potency than 30c.)
STORING A FIRST-AID KIT
All ﬁrst-aid items should be kept together, 
preferably in a sturdy box, and stored in a 
cool, dry place. Kept like this, homeopathic 
remedies will retain their strength for 
years. Every adult member of a household 
should know where the ﬁrst-aid kit is kept, 
and have easy access to it, and it should 
always be placed well beyond the reach of 
young children.
BASIC REMEDIES
These remedies for common minor injuries 
and illnesses make a good start-up 
selection, which can be added to gradually. 
Dosages are suitable for adults, children, 
and babies.
• Aconite 30c  • Rhus tox. 6c
• Apis 30c • Ruta 6c
• Arnica 6c, 30c  • Silica 6c
• Bryonia 30c • Symphytum 6c
• Cantharis 6c, 30c • Urtica urens 6c
• Carbo veg. 30c
• Euphrasia 6c
• Hypericum 30c
• Ledum 6c
• Nux vomica 6c
• Phosphorus 6c
MOTHER TINCTURES
Tinctures are used in solution for cleaning 
around wounds—usually 10 drops of 
tincture to 1¼  quarts (liters ) cooled, boiled 
water. Euphrasia in a saline solution—1 tsp 
salt to ¾ cup cooled, boiled water—is used 
for bathing eyes.
• Arnica
• Calendula
• Euphrasia
• HypericumCREAMS & OINTMENTS
Homeopathic creams and ointments  
protect against infection, soothe pain,  
and promote healing. Creams are  
absorbed more quickly and are less  
greasy than ointments. Arnica should  
not be applied to broken skin; only sterile 
creams and ointments should be applied  
to skin that is broken.
• Arnica cream
• Calendula cream
• Calendula ointment
• Hypericum ointment
• Urtica ointment
BASIC EQUIPMENT
A ﬁrst-aid kit should include a variety  
of sizes and shapes of bandages  
and adhesive dressings, dressings  
such as sterile pads and gauze,  
sterile eye pads, scissors, tweezers,  
and safety pins.
• Sterile gauze and pads
• Crepe roller bandage
• Butterﬂy strips
• Triangular bandage
• Adhesive dressings
• Scissors and tweezers
• Safety pinsADMINISTERING REMEDIES
Homeopathic remedies can be given in the 
same way to babies, children, and adults. 
Placed under the tongue, tablets or pilules 
dissolve quickly. For babies and small 
children, however, remedies made up on 
granules or powder may be preferable. They 
dissolve almost instantly and cannot be 
spat out. Alternatively, pilules can be 
crushed between two spoons.
The basic homeopathic remedies  
are easy and safe to take if a person  
is incapacitated by anxiety, fear, or 
restlessness, and creams, ointments,  
and solutions are both soothing and non-
abrasive when applied to open wounds.
Homeopathic products can be used in 
conjunction with those of other medicinal 
therapies, such as herbal tinctures and 
creams. Aloe vera, for example, is very  
good for sunburn, while Bach Flower 
Remedies can be used to treat anxiety,  
fear, or restlessness.

272 •HOMEOPATHIC FIRST AID
MINOR CUTS & GRAZES
Cuts and grazes break the skin, allowing blood to get out and 
infection to get in. Surrounding and underlying tissue may also be 
torn and bruised.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Clean the wound by rinsing it under running 
water. Pat dry and cover with sterile gauze. Clean around the wound 
with a solution of calendula and hypericum (see page 271 ). Apply an 
adhesive dressing.
CAUTION If the wound becomes more painful or develops pus,  
seek medical help.
ANIMAL BITES
A bite can result in a puncture wound that produces little blood to 
wash away foreign objects or bacteria. If the wound is deep, the tissue 
beneath may be damaged. Snake bites may have two puncture holes, 
with inﬂammation and localized pain. If the snake is poisonous, other 
parts of the body may be affected. Damage to the nervous system may 
cause headache, vomiting, faintness, and breathing difﬁculties.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT With all bites except venomous snake bites, 
hold the wound under running water for at least ﬁve minutes. Bathe 
with a solution of calendula and hypericum (see page 271) . Pat dry 
with a sterile pad, cover with a dressing, and go to the hospital. With 
a venomous snake bite, immobilize the victim immediately and 
completely, and call 911 . Apply a bandage ﬁrmly above the bite, then 
bandage the entire limb upward to deter the spread of venom in the 
body. If the head of a tick is buried in the skin, make sure that the 
whole body is removed using sterilized tweezers.
CAUTION Seek medical help for all animal and snake bites.
STINGS
Many insect stings cause little more than local problems unless  
the victim has a severe allergic reaction (anaphylactic shock: see  
page 206 ). There may be swelling, pain, and—because the skin  
is broken—infection. In some regions of the world, however,  
the stings of certain insects, ﬁsh, and jellyﬁsh may induce  
breathing difﬁculties or a loss of consciousness (see page 270) ,  
or may even be fatal.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Remove a stinger by brushing it off with a 
ﬁngernail or credit card and bathe the area with a calendula 
solution (see page 271) . Do not suck out the poison. If a stinger 
cannot be removed, seek medical help. If a spine from a marine 
creature has entered the foot, immerse in as hot water as is 
bearable for at least 30 minutes. Take the victim to the hospital to 
have the spines removed.
CAUTION If a sting is in the mouth or throat, rinse with ice-cold water 
to prevent swelling and possible breathing difﬁculties, and go to the 
hospital immediately. If a sting produces a severe reaction, call 911  
immediately.Arnica  
(see page 37)  
30c every 2 hours for 6 doses, then 
3 times daily up to 3 days
Ledum  
(see page 152)  
6c every 2 hours for 6 doses, then 
3 times daily up to 3 days
Hypericum  
(see page 148)  
30c every 2 hours 
up to 3 days
Arnica  
(see page 37)  
30c every 5 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Lachesis  
(see page 152)  
6c every 8 hours 
up to 3 days
Crotalus  
(see page 104)  
30c every 15 minutes 
up to 6 doses
Arnica  
(see page 37)  
30c every 5 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Ledum  
(see page 152)  
6c every 8 hours 
up to 3 days
Apis 
(see page 104)  
30c every 15 minutes 
up to 6 doses• Cuts and grazes surrounded by 
moderate to severe bruising
• Cuts and grazes that feel numb 
and cold but are better for 
applying cold compresses
• Damage to the nerve, with 
shooting pains
• Bite associated with swelling, 
bruising, or pain
• Area surrounding the site of a bite 
has bluish purple appearance
• Site of a bite is hot, red,  
and swollen
• Sting associated with swelling, 
bruising, or pain
• Site of a sting feels cold and 
numb and is better for cold 
compresses
• Site of a sting is hot, red,  
and swollenREMEDY & DOSAGE PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS AILMENT

•273 FIRST AID
MINOR BURNS & SCALDS
Burns are caused by heat, friction, or chemicals. Scalds are caused 
by hot liquids.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Avoid touching the wound. Hold the affected 
area under cold, running water for up to ten minutes to reduce pain 
and swelling, and then cover with plastic wrap or a sterile burn 
dressing if available (see page 270) .
CAUTION If the burned area is larger than the palm of a hand, seek 
medical help immediately.
BLISTERS
These are bubbles containing the serum from blood. They form 
beneath the surface of the skin in response to friction, burns, or scalds.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Bathe with a solution of calendula and 
hypericum (see page 271) , and then leave exposed to the air.
CAUTION Never burst a blister. If a blister is larger than 1 in (2.5 cm), 
seek medical help.
SPRAINS & STRAINS
Sprains affect ligaments at a joint and strains affect muscles. Both 
are caused by overstretching, which leads to swelling, stiffness, and 
pain when the joint is used.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Support the injury in the most comfortable, 
raised position. Apply arnica cream and, if the affected part of the 
body permits, bandage ﬁrmly. Keep the injury raised and at rest. If 
there is swelling, apply cold compresses soaked in arnica solution 
(see page 271)  or apply a covered ice pack.
CAUTION If pain and swelling persist for more than a few hours,  
seek medical help.
BRUISING
A bruise is created when the smallest blood vessels—the 
capillaries—are broken. Blood seeps into the surrounding tissue 
but soon clots and seals the damaged area, thus preventing  
further leakage.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT If the skin is unbroken, apply arnica cream. If 
the bruise is very painful and swollen, apply a covered ice pack or a 
cloth soaked in ice-cold water on it for ten minutes. Never apply an 
ice pack directly on to the skin.
CAUTION If a bruise has not faded after one week, or the amount of 
bruising is disproportionately large for the injury, or bruising appears 
for no reason, seek medical help.Arnica  
(see page 37)  
30c every 15 minutes 
up to 3 doses
Cantharis  
(see page 105)  
30c every 15 minutes 
up to 6 doses
Urtica urens  
(see page 170)  
6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Cantharis  
(see page 105)  
6c 4 times daily  
until pain wears off
Rhus tox.  
(see page 162)  
6c 4 times daily 
until pain wears off
Arnica  
(see page 37)  
30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses
Ruta 
(see page 163)  
6c 4 times daily until pain  
and stiffness wear off
Arnica  
(see page 37)  
30c every 10–15 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Bellis  
(see page 129)  
30c every 10–15 minutes 
up to 10 doses• Immediate shock of injury
• Blistering and searing or smarting 
pain that is better for the 
application of cold compresses to 
the wound
• Burn or scald that continues  
to sting
• Blister burns and itches, and 
is better for applying cold 
compresses
• Blister is red, swollen, and 
extremely itchy
• Pain, swelling, and stiffness 
immediately after injury
• Pain and stiffness continues
• Bruising after damage to  
surface tissue
• Bruising deep in a muscle, such 
as the quadriceps or hamstring, 
as a result of a sports injuryREMEDY & DOSAGE PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS AILMENT

274 •HOMEOPATHIC FIRST AID
SPLINTERS
Splinters are small pieces of wood or metal that puncture the skin. 
The main risk is from infection, including tetanus.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT If the splinter is protruding, remove it 
carefully with tweezers. If a splinter is embedded or difﬁcult to 
dislodge, do not attempt to remove it. Instead, pad around it and 
seek medical help.
CAUTION If the wound develops pus, seek medical help.
NOSEBLEEDS
A nosebleed is the loss of blood from the membrane lining  
the inside of the nose, usually occurring only on one side. 
Nosebleeds are common in childhood, and are usually minor 
and easily stopped. They may be caused by trauma to the nose 
or by the weakening of blood vessels as a result of blowing  
the nose too hard.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Lean over a bowl and pinch the lower part of 
the nose for at least ten minutes, then gradually release. If the 
bleeding has not stopped, repeat.
CAUTION If bleeding has not responded to self-help measures within 
20 minutes, or nosebleeds keep recurring, seek medical help. If the 
nose bleeds following a head injury, call 911  immediately.
MINOR EYE & EAR INJURIES
Both the surface of the eye and the outer ear canal are very  
delicate, and can easily be damaged by injury or the entry of  
a foreign object.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Gently wash away any dust or grit from an 
injured eye with cold water. Bathe the eye with a solution of 
calendula and hypericum (see page 271) . If there is pain after the 
removal of a foreign object, bathe the eye with euphrasia solution 
(see page 271)  every four hours. If there is a foreign object in the 
ear, such as a bee or other insect, wash out the ear with a tepid 
solution of calendula and hypericum.
CAUTION For serious eye injuries, always seek medical help. If a 
chemical has entered an eye, or there has been a penetrating 
wound, call 911 . If an object is stuck in the ear and does not ﬂoat 
out easily when the ear is washed out, see a doctor as soon as 
possible. Do not insert anything into the ear.Silica  
(see page 97)  
6c 4 times daily 
up to 14 days
Arnica  
(see page 37)  
6c every 2 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Phosphorus  
(see page 94)  
6c every 2 minutes up to 10 doses
Ipecac.  
(see page 45)  
6c every 2 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Arnica  
(see page 37)  
6c every 2 hours  
up to 4 doses
Ledum  
(see page 152)  
6c every 2 hours  
up to 10 doses
Euphrasia  
(see page 142)  
6c every 2 hours 
up to 3 doses
Hypericum  
(see page 148)  
30c half-hourly 
up to 10 doses
Arnica  
(see page 37)  
30c every 4 hours 
up to 6 doses• Pain and tenderness remaining 
after a splinter has been 
removed, or because tiny 
fragments of splinter remain 
under the skin
• Nosebleed following injury
• Nosebleed following violent  
nose blowing
• Blood is very bright red and 
nosebleed is accompanied  
by nausea
• Black eye or bruising around an 
eye immediately after an injury
   
• Black eye with persistent pain 
that is better for applying a cold 
compress or an ice pack
• Persistent pain after removing  
a foreign object from an eye
• Persistent pain after removing  
a foreign object from an ear
• Postoperative pain when a 
foreign object has been surgically 
removed from an earREMEDY & DOSAGE PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS AILMENT

•275 FIRST AID
FAINTING
Fainting is due to the temporary disruption of blood ﬂow to the 
brain. It may be brought on by pain, hunger, or emotional stress.  
It should be differentiated from shock, which, particularly if it is 
caused by internal bleeding, may resemble a faint, especially if 
there is no obvious loss of blood.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT A person who has fainted but is breathing 
normally should be placed in a safe position (see page 270) to keep 
the airway open. To prevent fainting—if there is nausea and 
unsteadiness, and the complexion is unusually pale—lie down and 
take deep breaths. Raise the feet to increase blood ﬂow to the brain. 
Loosen tight clothing and increase ventilation in the room.
CAUTION If a faint lasts for more than a few minutes, consider  
the possibility that the victim might be in shock and, if necessar y, 
call 911 .
TRAVEL SICKNESS
This ailment occurs when the balance mechanism in the inner  
ear is upset by motion, especially while reading or focusing  
on stationary objects. Travel sickness is most common  
among children.
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Avoid eating greasy foods and overeating 
before traveling. To prevent travel sickness, begin taking the 
appropriate remedy one hour before starting a journey. If there  
is vomiting, sip water frequently to avoid dehydration. If possible, 
increase ventilation in the vehicle in which you are traveling.
CAUTION People with insulin-dependent diabetes should be observed 
for hypoglycemia (see page 191)  and given glucose or a sugary drink 
if necessary.
HEAT EXHAUSTION
This occurs in hot and humid climatic conditions and is caused  
by excessive ﬂuid loss from the body .
ESSENTIAL TREATMENT Lie down in a cool place. If possible, direct  
the ﬂow of air from an electric fan on to your body or lie beneath a 
wet sheet to cool down. Sip water or other clear liquids frequently  
to prevent dehydration.
CAUTION If the body temperature continues to rise,  
call 911 .Ignatia  
(see page 57)  
6c every 5 minutes  
up to 10 doses
Aconite  
(see page 32)  
30c every 5 minutes  
up to 10 doses
Coffea  
(see page 50)  
6c every 5 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Pulsatilla  
(see page 61)  
6c every 5 minutes  
up to 10 doses
Nux vomica  
(see page 63)  
6c every 5 minutes  
up to 10 doses
Tabacum  
(see page 158)  
6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Cocculus  
(see page 124)  
6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Nux vomica  
(see page 63)  
6c every 15 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Bryonia  
(see page 42)  
30c every 5 minutes 
up to 10 doses
Glonoinum  
(see page 170)  
30c every 5 minutes 
up to 10 doses• Fainting due to intense emotion
• Fainting due to a fright or shock, 
particularly after witnessing  
an accident
• Fainting due to overexcitement
• Fainting in hot, stuffy 
surroundings
• Fainting at the sight of blood
• Nausea and chilliness
• Giddiness and fainting
• Sensation as though there is a 
tight band around the head
• Worse for tobacco smoke
• Giddiness and exhaustion with 
desire to lie down
• Sight of food induces nausea and 
increased salivation
• Headache at the back of the eyes 
or over one eye
• Chilliness and constipation
• Worse for tobacco smoke, eating, 
and coffee
• Heat exhaustion accompanied  
by nausea and a severe  
headache that is worse for  
the slightest movement
• Heat exhaustion accompanied by 
a throbbing, bursting headache, 
sweaty skin, and a hot faceREMEDY & DOSAGE PHYSICAL SYMPTOMS AILMENT

276 •
A–Z QUICK 
REFERENCEA–Z QUICK REFERENCE
ABROTANUM
Artemisia abrotanum
Key uses
• Chest symptoms that develop after skin 
eruptions have failed to come out
• Emaciation and debilitation of the lower 
limbs, possibly in children who fail to 
thrive, or due to polio
• Heart disease following the suppression 
of rheumatic symptoms
• Mumps transferred from the parotid 
glands to the testes
See Materia Medica page 126ABIES NIG.
Resina piceae
Key uses
• Indigestion, with a knotted sensation and 
stomach pains after eating
• Hiatus hernia, gastritis, peptic ulcer
See Materia Medica page 162
ACONITE
Aconitum napellus
Key uses
• Acute respiratory infections
• Eye and ear infections
• Fear, shock, and anxiety
• Problems in labor
See Materia Medica  page 32
See also  pages 183 , 186, 187, 196, 211, 
212, 213, 218–219 , 226–27 , 228–29 ,  
238–39 , 244–45 , 248–49 , 250–51 ,  
256–57 , 271, 275ACETIC AC.
Acidum aceticum
Key uses
• Breathlessness
• Diabetes
• Fainting
• Hemorrhaging
• Postoperative exhaustion
• Severe burning pains and tenderness  
in the stomach
• Water retention
See Materia Medica  pages 118–19ABIES CAN.
Abies canadensis
Key uses
• Digestive disorders associated with 
inflamed mucous membranes in the 
stomach and poor absorption of food
• Palpitations caused by nausea, bloating, 
and severe burning pain in the abdomen
See Materia Medica page 118
ABSINTHIUM
Artemisia absinthium
Key uses
• Fits, seizures, and epilepsy in children
• Nervousness in children
• Terrible dreams and insomnia in children
• Trembling, grimacing, and unsteadiness, 
possibly linked to alcoholism
• Vertigo in children
See Materia Medica  pages 126–27
ACTAEA SPIC.
Actaea spicata
Key uses
• Rheumatoid arthritis with pain that  
may be severe enough to make the  
limbs feel paralyzed
• Rheumatism of the small joints  
of the hands and wrists
See Materia Medica  page 120This quick-reference guide to the 322 remedies described in this book 
summarizes the possible key benefits of each remedy . It refers you to the 
appropriate page in the Materia Medica for more detailed information,  
as well as to other parts of the book where this remedy is recommended.  
Unlike the rest of the book, in this guide the entries are arranged in 
alphabetical order by the commonly used, homeopathic names of the 
remedies, enabling you quickly to locate details on the remedies you will  
find in health-food stores and drugstores.

•277 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
ADONIS
Adonis vernalis
Key uses
• Asthma
• Headaches
• Heart degeneration, perhaps following  
a bout of severe influenza or  
rheumatic fever
• Edema
See Materia Medica  page 121AESCULUS
Aesculus hippocastanum
Key uses
• Dry , rough, burning throat
• Hemorrhoids
• Varicose veins
• Pain in the small of the back
See Materia Medica  page 121
See also  pages 238–39
AGNUS CASTUS
Vitex agnus-castus
Key uses
• Fatigue
• Impotence
• Loss of libido
• Postpartum depression
• Premature ejaculation
See Materia Medica  page 173
See also  pages 203 , 264–65AGARICUS
Agaricus muscarius
Key uses
• Alcoholism
• Chilblains
• Chorea
• Nervous system disorders
• Parkinson’s disease
See Materia Medica  page 33
See also  pages 179 , 186, 220–21 , 230–31
ALFALFA
Medicago sativa
Key uses
• Anorexia
• Cancer
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Insomnia
• Malnutrition and weight loss
• Nervous indigestion
See Materia Medica  page 154AILANTHUS
Ailanthus altissima
Key uses
• Fevers with great weakness and 
congestion of the blood
• Mononucleosis, with swollen tonsils  
and neck glands
See Materia Medica  page 122
See also  pages 254–55AETHUSA
Aethusa cynapium
Key uses
• Anxiety with associated diarrhea
• Confused state of mind with  
scattered thoughts
• Marked dullness and sluggish  
mental state
• Milk intolerance in children
See Materia Medica  page 121
AGRAPHIS
Agraphis nutans
Key uses
• Ear, nose, and throat infections linked to 
catarrh and deafness, chills that develop 
after exposure to cold winds, and 
swelling of the adenoids and tonsils
See Materia Medica  page 122
ALLIUM CEPA
Allium cepa
Key uses
• Allergies
• Catarrh
• Eye irritation
• Hay fever and allergic rhinitis
• Neuralgic pains
• Throat and chest infections
See Materia Medica  page 34
See also  pages 207 , 224–25

278 •
ALLIUM SAT.
Allium sativum
Key uses
• Indigestion caused by a rich diet  
or by dietary change
• Tearing pains in the hip area  
and abdomen
See Materia Medica  page 122A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
ALOE
Aloe ferox ‘Miller’
Key uses
• Diarrhea
• Hemorrhoids
• Headaches
• Hepatitis
• Involuntary stool
See Materia Medica  page 35
See also  pages 238–39
AMBROSIA
Ambrosia artemisiaefolia
Key uses
• Hay fever, possibly involving eyes that 
water, smart, burn, and itch, a congested 
nose or head, watery catarrh, sneezing,  
or nosebleeds, wheezy coughs,  
asthmatic irritations, or whooping  
cough, and diarrhea
See Materia Medica  page 123ALUMINA
Aluminum oxydatum
Key uses
• Appetite disorders
• Constipation
• Dementia
• Fatigue
• Nervous disorders
• Alzheimer’s disease
See Materia Medica  page 72
See also  pages 238–39
AMMONIUM MUR.
Ammonium chloratum
Key uses
• Enlarged glands
• Inflammatory eye conditions
• Liver complaints
• Menstrual disorders
• Respiratory disorders, such as congested 
nose, sneezing, reduced sense of smell, 
sore throat, hoarseness, and thick,  
slimy mucus
• Sciatica and joint pains
See Materia Medica  page 123
See also  pages 218–19AMMONIUM CARB.
Ammonium carbonicum
Key uses
• Fatigue
• Poor circulation
• Respiratory illnesses
• Scarlet fever
• Skin conditions
See Materia Medica  page 73ALUMEN
Aluminum potassium 
sulphuricum
Key uses
• Bleeding hemorrhoids
• Bowel problems, especially in the elderly
• Deep anal ache
• Dysentery and bloody diarrhea
• Painful ulceration in the rectum
• Paralytic, sluggish muscle weakness
• Severe constipation, possibly due  
to uterine or rectal cancer
See Materia Medica  page 123
AMMONIUM BROM.
Ammonium bromatum
Key uses
• Coughs
• Epilepsy
• Neuralgic headaches
• Ovarian problems
• Sore eyes
See Materia Medica  page 123
AMYL NIT.
Amylium nitrosum
Key uses
• Heart symptoms, such as chest pains  
and feelings of oppression
• Hot flashes in conjunction with 
sunstroke, heart problems, or  
menopause
See Materia Medica  page 124

•279 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
ANACARDIUM OCC.
Anacardium occidentale
Key uses
• Exam nerves and phobias
• Leprosy
• Muscle complaints
• Skin eruptions
• Warts
See Materia Medica  page 124
See also  pages 254–55ANACARDIUM OR.
Anacardium orientale
Key uses
• Chest pains
• Digestive disorders
• Low self-esteem
• Psychological problems
• Skin conditions
See Materia Medica  page 36
See also  page 211
ANHALONIUM
Anhalonium lewinii
Key uses
• Hallucinations with blurred or 
multicolored vision disturbances
• Lack of coordination, possibly with 
muscle tremors, nausea, faintness, 
giddiness, and neuralgic pains  
and facial paralysis
• Mental exhaustion
• Migraines and other headaches
See Materia Medica  page 124ANGUSTURA
Galipea officinalis
Key uses
• Nervous system disorders
• Rheumatic conditions
See Materia Medica  page 144
APIS
Apis mellifica
Key uses
• Bites and stings
• Cystitis
• Fever
• Inflammation of the eyes, lips, mouth,  
or throat
• Edema
• Urticaria
See Materia Medica  page 104
See also  pages 185 , 186, 196, 202, 207, 
242–43ANTIMONIUM TART.
Tartarus stibiatus
Key uses
• Chicken pox
• Headaches
• Nausea
• Respiratory illnesses with  
rattling chest
• Skin conditions
• Whooping cough 
See Materia Medica  page 100
See also  page 181ANANTHEUM
Vetiveria zizianoides
Key uses
• Hard, glandular swellings, especially  
in the neck
• Itchy skin eruptions, notably on the scalp 
and eyebrows
• Neuralgic headaches
• Skin disorders
See Materia Medica  page 172
ANTIMONIUM CRUD.
Stibium sulphuratum nigrum
Key uses
• Digestive disorders
• Gout
• Skin and nail conditions
• Skin infections with a rash
• Toothaches
See Materia Medica  page 98
APOCYNUM
Apocynum cannabinum
Key uses
• Edema associated with diseased organs, 
and possibly linked with Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma or Bright’s disease
See Materia Medica  page 124

280 •
ARANEA DIADEMA
Araneus diadematus
Key uses
• Nervous system disorders accompanied 
by coldness, susceptibility to damp,  
and numbness
See Materia Medica  page 125A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
ARGENTUM MET.
Argentum metallicum
Key uses
• Arthritis
• Bleeding between menstrual periods  
or heavy menopausal hemorrhaging
• Joint and bone disorders associated  
with the connective tissues, especially  
the cartilage
• Men’s reproductive system disorders
• Ovarian pain, possibly due to cysts  
or tumors
See Materia Medica  pages 125–26
ARSEN. ALB.
Acidum arsenicosum
Key uses
• Digestive disorders
• Eye inflammation
• Food poisoning
• Headaches
• Respiratory illnesses
• Raynaud’s syndrome
See Materia Medica  page 68
See also  pages 181 , 182, 183, 185, 189, 
190, 193, 194, 195, 200, 205, 207, 209, 
212, 232–33 , 236–37 , 238–39 , 240–41 , 
242–43 , 244–45 , 248–49 , 268–69ARNICA
Arnica montana
Key uses
• Fever
• Joint and muscle pain
• Post-childbirth pain
• Shock, injury , and postoperative care
• Skin conditions
• Tooth and gum pain
See Materia Medica  page 37
See also  pages 185 , 187, 201, 213,  
230–31 , 264–65 , 266–67 , 271
ARUM MAC.
Arum maculatum
Key uses
• Respiratory tract problems, such as 
asthma, profuse catarrh, violent cough, 
and nasal polyps
See Materia Medica  page 127ARTEMISIA
Artemisia vulgaris
Key uses
• Chorea
• Epilepsy
• Fits and seizures, including petit mal  
in children
• Nervous disorders, triggered by bad 
news, grief, or a blow to the head
• Sleepwalking
See Materia Medica  page 127ARGENTUM NIT.
Argentum nitricum
Key uses
• Anxiety and phobias
• Digestive problems
• Irritable bowel syndrome
• Multiple sclerosis
• Nervous disorders
See Materia Medica  page 74
See also  pages 179 , 185, 186, 189, 191, 
202, 211, 238–39 , 254–55
ARSEN. IOD.
Arsenicum iodatum
Key uses
• Asthma
• Hay fever
• Influenza
• Hyperactivity
See Materia Medica  page 126
See also  pages 224–25
ARUM TRIPH.
Arisaema triphyllum
Key uses
• Allergic skin reactions
• Eczema
• Hay fever
• Scarlet fever
See Materia Medica  page 126
See also  page 207

•281 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
ARUNDO
Arundo mauritanica
Key uses
• Allergies, especially hay fever, catarrhal 
inflammation, and extreme itching inside 
the nose
• Blepharitis
• Wet coughs with breathlessness
See Materia Medica  page 127
See also  page 207ASAFOETIDA
Ferula assa-foetida
Key uses
• Digestive disorders
• Nervous twitching
• Sensation of a lump rising from  
the stomach
See Materia Medica  page 143
ASTACUS
Astacus fluviatilis
Key uses
• Enlarged and inflamed glands, especially 
in children and the elderly
• Inflammation in the liver area
• Urticaria, particularly if the rash is 
accompanied by cramps and pain
See Materia Medica  page 128ASCLEPIAS TUB.
Asclepias tuberosa
Key uses
• Catarrh
• Respiratory inflammation, such as 
bronchitis, influenza, pleurisy , or other 
feverish conditions with a painful, dry , 
hacking cough
• Rheumatic pain in the muscles and joints
See Materia Medica  page 128
AURUM MUR.
Aurum chloratum
Key uses
• Cancer
• Fibroids
• Edema, with a feeling of congestion  
in the liver, kidneys, and genitals
• Heart conditions, such as palpitations  
and a sense of constriction in the chest
See Materia Medica  page 128
See also  pages 199 , 209AURUM MET.
Aurum metallicum
Key uses
• Angina
• Bone pain
• Depression
• Headaches
• Reproductive system problems
See Materia Medica  page 75
See also  pages 185 , 186, 187 , 197, 203, 
211, 212, 213ASARUM
Asarum europaeum
Key uses
• Alcoholism
• Aversion to sexual intercourse
• Digestive problems, possibly associated 
with anorexia
• Nervous hypersensitivity and edgy , 
hysterical behavior
• Severe insomnia
See Materia Medica  page 127
ASTERIAS
Asterias rubens
Key uses
• Circulatory disorders, such as strokes
• Hard, swollen glands in the armpits
• High libido in women, causing restless 
sleep, erotic dreams, bad temper,  
and weepiness
• Left-sided symptoms, especially  
in women
• Obstinate constipation, especially  
during menopause
• Sharp breast pains at night
See Materia Medica  page 128
AVENA
Avena sativa
Key uses
• Chronic insomnia
• Great weakness
• Low libido
• Male impotence, possibly linked  
with excessive sexual activity
• Nervous exhaustion
See Materia Medica  page 129

282 •
BACILLINUM
Bacillinum pulmo
Key uses
• Respiratory problems, such as shortness 
of breath, hacking coughs, purulent 
mucus, asthma, and sharp pains in the 
heart area
• Skin conditions, such as eczema,  
pimples, ringworm, alopecia areata, and  
a susceptibility to fungal skin infections
• T uberculosis and pneumonia
See Materia Medica  page 129
See also  pages 182 , 183A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
BADIAGA
Spongilla fluviatilis
Key uses
• Hard, swollen glands in the neck  
and breast
• Profuse mucus in the respiratory system, 
with copious catarrh, possibly due  
to influenza or hay fever
• Sneezing brought on by coughing
See Materia Medica  page 167
BARYTA MUR.
Barium chloratum
Key uses
• Acutely swollen glands
• Mental disability in children with  
delayed development
• Nervous system disorders,  
such as seizures
• Retardation in elderly people
• Severe eczema
• Strokes
See Materia Medica  page 129
See also  page 194BARYTA CARB.
Barium carbonicum
Key uses
• Anxiety and phobias
• Growth disorders in children
• Impotence
• Problems of the elderly
• Respiratory illnesses
• Swollen tonsils
See Materia Medica  page 76
See also  pages 187 , 202, 266–67
BENZOIC AC.
Acidum benzoicum
Key uses
• Cracking joints, possibly linked to gout
• Frothy , white stools
• Strong-smelling urine and incontinence  
at night
• Wandering pains
See Materia Medica  page 119BELLIS
Bellis perennis
Key uses
• Muscle strain, sprains, and bruises
• Pain during pregnancy or after 
miscarriage or surgery
• Prolonged pain after injury
• T umors on the sites of old injuries
• Varicose veins and congestion of the veins
See Materia Medica  page 129
See also  page 273BAPTISIA
Baptisia tinctoria
Key uses
• Acute fever
• Intestinal infections
• Septic conditions
• Throat infections
See Materia Medica  page 40
BELLADONNA
Atropa belladonna
Key uses
• Acute fever and pain
• Headaches and migraines
• Menstrual pain
• Sore throat and dry cough
See Materia Medica  page 39
See also  pages 193 , 196, 201, 205,  
222–23 , 224–25 , 232–33 , 240–41 ,  
246–47 , 248–49 , 250–51 , 252–53 ,  
262–63
BERBERIS
Berberis vulgaris
Key uses
• Cystitis with offensive smell
• Gallbladder problems
• Joint pain
• Kidney disorders
• Lower back pain
See Materia Medica  page 41

•283 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
BISMUTH MET.
Bismuthum metallicum
Key uses
• Violent abdominal pains, possibly with 
burning and ulceration in the stomach, 
bowels, and throat, accompanied by 
belching and flatulence
See Materia Medica  page 130BORAX
Natrum tetraboracicum
Key uses
• Cold sores on the lips
• Painful ulcers in the mouth or  
on the tongue
• Ulceration in the gastrointestinal tract
See Materia Medica  page 157
See also  page 211
BROMUM
Bromum
Key uses
• Disorders of the thyroid, ovary ,  
or left testicle
• Respiratory problems, such as colds
See Materia Medica  page 130
See also  page 209BOTHROPS
Bothrops lanceolatus
Key uses
• Bruising
• Hemorrhaging of thin blood that  
will not clot
• Severe premenstrual syndrome
See Materia Medica  page 130
CACTUS GRAND.
Selenicereus grandiflorus
Key uses
• Constriction of the muscle fibers  
in general
• Heart conditions, especially pain  
triggered by angina
• Painful feeling of the body being caged 
and twisted
See Materia Medica  page 165
See also  page 185BUFO
Bufo bufo
Key uses
• Extremely high sex drive, frequent 
masturbation, poorly developed sexual 
relationships, and sexual depravity
• Seizures
• Skin problems, such as blisters and 
itching, burning pustules
See Materia Medica  pages 130–31BORIC AC.
Acidum boricum
Key uses
• Dizziness
• Eyes that are prone to swelling  
and conjunctivitis
• Headaches accompanied by nausea
• Heavy , nauseous feeling in the stomach
• Putrefying wounds
• Skin eruptions
See Materia Medica  page 119
BRYONIA
Bryonia alba
Key uses
• Breast problems
• Colds and influenza
• Constipation
• Dry cough
• Headaches
• Joint pain
See Materia Medica  page 42
See also  pages 183 , 196, 197, 201,  
228–29 , 238–39 , 252–53 , 258–59 , 275
CADMIUM MET.
Cadmium metallicum
Key uses
• Colitis
• Constipation
• Great fatigue
• Hemorrhoids
• Hernias in the diaphragm
• Painful abdominal bloating
See Materia Medica  page 131

284 •
CADMIUM SULPH.
Cadmium sulphuricum
Key uses
• Stomach problems accompanied by 
sharp, cutting abdominal pains, severe 
nausea, and vomiting
• Bell’s palsy
See Materia Medica  page 131
See also  page 212A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
CALADIUM
Caladium seguinum
Key uses
• Debilitation, forgetfulness, nervousness, 
and restlessness, perhaps following  
a feverish illness
• Impotence
See Materia Medica  page 131
CALC. IOD.
Calcium iodatum
Key uses
• Adenoid complaints
• Enlarged tonsils
• Fibroids
• Thyroid enlargement during puberty
See Materia Medica  page 132
See also  page 199CALC. FLUOR.
Calcium fluoratum
Key uses
• Bone malnutrition and deformity
• Brittle teeth
• Enlarged or varicose veins
• Hard lumps that develop on the  
skull and jaw
• Swollen, inflamed joints
• T umors and growths
See Materia Medica  pages 131–32
See also  page 209
CALC. SULPH.
Calcium sulphuricum
Key uses
• Mucous-membrane discharges, especially 
thick, yellow-colored catarrh or lumpy 
mucus with a cough
• Suppurating, yellow discharges of pus in 
wounds and other skin conditions, such 
as eczema and acne, as well as the  
glands and bones
See Materia Medica  page 132CALC. SIL.
Calcium silicatum
Key uses
• Boils, warts, or abscesses
• Lack of confidence
• Severe acne or acne rosacea
See Materia Medica  page 132CALC. CARB.
Calcium carbonicum 
Hahnemanni
Key uses
• Anxiety and phobias
• Bone, joint, and dental problems
• Digestive disorders
• Headaches
• Women’s health
• Recurrent colds and ear infections
See Materia Medica  page 77
See also  pages 181 , 182, 183, 186, 194, 
196, 199, 201, 202, 205, 207, 211, 212, 
250–51 , 254–55 , 256–57 , 258–59 ,  
260–61 , 262–63
CALC. PHOS.
Calcium phosphoricum
Key uses
• Bone and joint conditions
• Digestive disorders
• Fatigue
• Growth disorders
• Head pain
• Teething
See Materia Medica  page 78
See also  pages 193 , 197, 201, 211
CALENDULA
Calendula officinalis
Key uses
• Bleeding in the gums after  
a tooth extraction
• Cuts and broken skin
• Eczema
• Leg and varicose ulcers
• Postoperative wounds
• Ruptured muscles or tendons
• Torn perineal tissues following childbirth
See Materia Medica  page 132

•285 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
CAMPHORA
Cinnamomum camphora
Key uses
• Cholera
• Colds with chills and sneezing
• Light-sensitive rashes 
See Materia Medica  pages 136–37CANNABIS IND.
Cannabis sativa ‘Indica’
Key uses
• Disordered mental state
• Headaches
• Pain or paralysis in the legs
• Urinary tract infections
See Materia Medica  page 43
See also  pages 266–67
CAPSICUM
Capsicum annuum  
var. annuum
Key uses
• Infections that tend to cause discharges
• Low vitality , perhaps in the elderly or 
those debilitated by alcoholism or 
prostate conditions
• Raw, burning throat
• Homesickness
See Materia Medica  page 133
See also  page 202CANTHARIS
Cantharis vesicatoria
Key uses
• Blisters
• Burns and scalds
• Excessive libido
• Gastritis, diarrhea, and dysentery
• Insect bites and stings
• Irritable bowel syndrome
• Severe cystitis
• Ulcerative colitis
See Materia Medica  page 105
See also  pages 189 , 190, 260–61 , 273
CARBOLIC AC.
Acidum carbolicum
Key uses
• Constipation with foul breath
• Diarrhea, dysentery , or cholera
• Increased urine production
• Malignant or septic wounds
• Sudden, burning, pricking, stinging 
pains, and collapse—for example, due  
to anaphylactic shock after a bee sting
• Vomiting due to sea sickness, pregnancy , 
or cancer
See Materia Medica  page 119CARBO VEG.
Carbo vegetabilis
Key uses
• Breathing problems
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Fatigue
• Indigestion and flatulence
• Poor circulation
See Materia Medica  page 44
See also  pages 189 , 193, 200, 205,  
234–35 , 236–37CANNABIS SAT.
Cannabis sativa
Key uses
• Reproductive system disorders, such  
as discharges from or narrowing of the 
urethra, inflammation of the penis,  
or acute gonorrhea
• Urinary tract disorders, such as  
infections and cystitis
See Materia Medica  page 133
CARBO AN.
Carbo animalis
Key uses
• Cancer
• Great fatigue
• Poor circulation with blue extremities
• Swollen, painful veins
See Materia Medica  page 133
See also  page 209
CARBON SULPH.
Carbonium sulphuratum
Key uses
• Chronic sciatic pain and twitching
• Digestive upsets
• Loss of sensation
• Progressive loss of vision
• Recurrent breathing difficulties
• Skin irritation
• Tinnitus
See Materia Medica  page 134
See also  pages 222–23

286 •
CARCINOSIN
Carcinosinum
Key uses
• Abdominal pain
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Insomnia
• Respiratory illnesses
• Skin growths and blemishes
See Materia Medica  page 106
See also  page 207A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
CARDUUS
Silybum marianum
Key uses
• Acute or chronic liver problems
• Gallbladder pain
• Gallstone colic
• Lung conditions, such as asthma
• Severe abdominal and liver pain
See Materia Medica  page 166
CAUSTICUM
Causticum Hahnemanni
Key uses
• Cough
• Multiple sclerosis
• Skin conditions
• Sore throat and laryngitis
• Tremors and paralysis
• Urinary disorders
See Materia Medica  page 79
See also  pages 179 , 196, 197, 201, 203, 
205, 212, 213, 228–29 , 242–43 , 248–49 , 
266–67 , 268–69CAULOPHYLLUM
Caulophyllum thalictroides
Key uses
• Rheumatic pains affecting the small 
joints, particularly in conjunction with 
menstruation or uterine problems
• Uterine disorders, such as excessive 
bleeding and lack of uterine muscle tone
See Materia Medica  page 134
CENCHRIS
Agkistrodon contortrix
Key uses
• Breathlessness
• Congestion in the blood vessels
• Fear of rape, pins and pointed objects, 
going to sleep, and sudden death
• Mental and physical restlessness
See Materia Medica  page 122CEDRON
Simarouba cedron
Key uses
• Neuralgic pains and other nervous system 
conditions, such as spasms or tics
• Recurrent fevers, such as those associated 
with malaria
• Severe headaches or migraines
See Materia Medica  page 166CASTOREUM
Castoreum
Key uses
• Chronic fatigue syndrome in women
• Nervousness in conjunction with  
profuse sweating
• Sudden spasms of abdominal pain
See Materia Medica  page 134
CEANOTHUS
Ceanothus americanus
Key uses
• Lethargy , with swelling, tenderness,  
and pain in the spleen
• Nervous excitement with chilliness
• Serious blood or lymph disorders, such  
as leukemia or Hodgkin’s disease
See Materia Medica  page 134
CHAMOMILLA
Chamomilla recutita
Key uses
• Colic and diarrhea
• Fever
• Irritability
• Menstrual and labor pains
• Toothaches, teething, and earaches
See Materia Medica  page 46
See also  pages 232–33 , 246–47 , 248–49 , 
262–63

•287 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
CHELIDONIUM
Chelidonium majus
Key uses
• Gallstones
• Headaches
• Hepatitis
• Pneumonia
• Shoulder pain
See Materia Medica  page 47CHENOPODIUM
Chenopodium ambrosioides 
var. anthelminticum
Key uses
• Effects of strokes, particularly those 
involving right-sided paralysis
• Right-sided migraines
See Materia Medica  page 135    
CHINA ARS.
Chininum arsenicosum
Key uses
• Asthma, with a sensation of suffocation, 
oppressed breathing, or anxiety
• Great fatigue, perhaps following chronic 
fatigue syndrome, or a serious illness 
such as malaria, or a debilitating  
epileptic attack
See Materia Medica  page 135CHINA
Cinchona officinalis
Key uses
• Digestive disorders
• Exhaustion due to illness
• Fever and headaches
• Insomnia
See Materia Medica  page 49
See also  pages 186 , 189, 205,  
212, 258–59
CHOCOLATE
Chocolatum
Key uses
• Fear of cars, accidents, illness, dogs,  
or being attacked
• Feelings of estrangement
• Great clumsiness and heaviness in the 
limbs, and constriction in the chest or 
head associated with nervous disorders
• Withdrawal and antisocial behavior
See Materia Medica  page 136CHIONANTHUS
Chionanthus virginicus
Key uses
• Biliary colic
• Gallstones
• Headaches, especially those associated 
with nervous tension or menstruation,  
or accompanied by digestive upsets
• Jaundice
• Liver pain accompanied by colic, cramps, 
vomiting, and intestinal discomfort
See Materia Medica  page 136CHIMAPHILA
Chimaphila umbellata
Key uses
• Men’s complaints, such as enlarged 
prostate, urine retention, and a feeling 
that there is a ball in the pelvis
• Urinary tract disorders, such as painful 
urination, obstructed urine flow, and 
cystitis with blood in the urine
See Materia Medica  page 135
See also  page 202
CHINA SULPH.
Chininum sulphuricum
Key uses
• Heavy , aching limbs
• Joint pains
• Recurrent fever, possibly due to malaria
• Severe head pain
• Sinking sensations when lying down
• Tender, sensitive spine
• Tinnitus
See Materia Medica  page 136
See also  pages 222–23
CICUTA
Cicuta virosa
Key uses
• Nervous system problems, such  
as stuttering, hiccups, sudden,  
strong jerks, or spasms
• Petit mal fits, epilepsy ,  
or violent convulsions
• Skin disorders, often involving pustules 
that leave yellowish scabs, such as 
impetigo or eczema
See Materia Medica  page 136
See also  page 194

288 •
CIMEX
Acanthia lectularia
Key uses
• Anxiety , especially after a chill or drinking 
alcohol, and possibly followed by a fever
• Joint or muscle ache
See Materia Medica  page 118A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
CIMICIFUGA
Cimicifuga racemosa
Key uses
• Depression
• Head and neck pain
• Menopause
• Menstrual problems
• Pregnancy
See Materia Medica  page 48
CISTUS
Cistus canadensis
Key uses
• Allergic rhinitis
• Frequent colds
• Glandular swelling and hardening, 
especially in the neck
• Sinusitis, chronic or recurrent
• Tonsillitis
• Upper respiratory tract infections
See Materia Medica  page 137CINNABARIS
Hydrargyrum sulphuratum 
rubrum
Key uses
• Genital and rectal ulceration and warts
• Headaches, inflamed eyes, catarrh, and 
sore throat
• Painful menstruation, pregnancy ,  
or labor
• Pimples, pustules, and skin eruptions
See Materia Medica  page 147
COCCULUS
Anamirta cocculus
Key uses
• Agitation
• Hypersensitivity to touch
• Muscle weakness, spasms in the legs,  
and gradual paralysis
• Sea- and travel-sickness, nausea,  
and vomiting
• Vertigo and dizziness
See Materia Medica  page 124
See also  page 275COCA
Erythroxylum coca
Key uses
• Altitude sickness
• Breathlessness or asthma
See Materia Medica  page 142CINA
Artemisia cina
Key uses
• Coughs and colds
• Intestinal worms
• Sleep problems
• Temper tantrums
• T witching muscles
See Materia Medica  page 38
See also  pages 246–47
CLEMATIS
Clematis recta
Key uses
• Abnormal urine flow
• Moist, itchy pustules on the back  
of the head or skull
• Skin complaints
• Swollen glands, especially of prostate, 
testes, ovaries, or breasts
• Urethral inflammation
See Materia Medica  page 137
COCCUS CACTI
Dactylopius coccus
Key uses
• Asthma
• Spasmodic coughing, especially 
whooping cough
• Urinary problems with pain  
in the kidneys
See Materia Medica  page 140

•289 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
COFFEA
Coffea cruda
Key uses
• Hot flashes during menopause
• Headaches
• Insomnia
• Overexcitement
• Palpitations
• Toothaches
See Materia Medica  page 50
See also  pages 232–33 , 244–45 , 248–49 , 
262–63 , 275COLCHICUM
Colchicum autumnale
Key uses
• Joint-membrane problems, especially  
in the small joints
• Muscle tissue disorders
• Nausea with colicky pains and painful 
distension of the abdomen
• Oversensitivity to external stimuli
• Rheumatoid arthritis
• Ulcerative colitis
See Materia Medica  page 137
See also  pages 190 , 197
COMOCLADIA
Comocladia dentata
Key uses
• Nerve sensitivity
• Skin problems, such as extreme itching, 
burning, inflammation, and blistering
See Materia Medica  page 138COLOCYNTHIS
Cucumis colocynthis
Key uses
• Colic
• Diarrhea
• Facial neuralgia
• Menstrual problems
• Neuralgic pains
See Materia Medica  page 52
See also  pages 189 , 190, 218–19 ,  
236–37 , 246–47
COPAIVA
Copaifera officinalis
Key uses
• Colds
• Chronic bronchitis
• Gonorrhea
• Leucorrhea
• Urethritis
See Materia Medica  page 138CONVALLARIA
Convallaria majalis
Key uses
• Heart disorders with symptoms that 
include fluttery or noisy heartbeats, 
palpitations, poor circulation, and  
water retention
• Soreness of the uterus in conjunction 
with heart palpitations
See Materia Medica  page 138COLLINSONIA
Collinsonia canadensis
Key uses
• Hemorrhoids
• Labor or pregnancy problems, such  
as itchy vulva during pregnancy ,  
or diarrhea after labor
• Menstrual pain
• Pelvic aches
See Materia Medica  page 137
CONIUM
Conium maculatum
Key uses
• Cysts, tumors, and cancer
• Enlarged prostate
• Nervous disorders
• Sexual problems
• Swollen breasts
See Materia Medica  page 51
See also  pages 186 , 201, 202, 203, 209, 
258–59
CORALLIUM
Corallium rubrum
Key uses
• Whooping and spasmodic coughs, 
accompanied by violent paroxysms, 
exhaustion, a smothering sensation,  
and the bringing up of blood
See Materia Medica  pages 138–39

290 •
CRATAEGUS
Crataegus laevigata
Key uses
• Palpitations, possibly accompanied  
by fainting and collapse
• Pulse that is fast, feeble, and intermittent
• Rapid heartbeat
• Weak heart
• Hypertension
See Materia Medica  page 139A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
CROCUS
Crocus sativus
Key uses
• Hemorrhaging, such as nosebleeds  
or uterine bleeding
• Nervous excitement with rapidly 
alternating moods and  
hysterical behavior
See Materia Medica  page 139
CROTON
Croton tiglium
Key uses
• Allergic skin conditions with extreme 
itching, such as eczema on the scrotum, 
or blistering rashes on the scrotum  
and penis
• Digestive problems, such as nausea and 
urgent diarrhea immediately after eating 
or drinking
• Headaches
See Materia Medica  page 139CROTALUS CASC.
Crotalus durissus terrificus
Key uses
• Sensations of constriction, which  
is sometimes felt as a band around  
the throat or abdomen
• Urticaria 
See Materia Medica  page 139
CUPRUM MET.
Cuprum metallicum
Key uses
• Abdominal cramps
• Asthma
• Convulsions and epilepsy
• Coughs
• Exhaustion
See Materia Medica  page 80
See also  pages 230–31CUPRUM ARS.
Cuprum arsenicosum
Key uses
• Irregular or weak heart function
• Poor kidney function
• Prolonged fluid loss—for example,  
after injury or an operation
See Materia Medica  page 140CROTALUS
Crotalus horridus horridus
Key uses
• Bleeding
• Cancer
• Delirium
• Heart disorders
• Strokes
• Throat infections
See Materia Medica  page 107
See also  page 209
CUBEBA
Piper cubeba
Key uses
• Cystitis
• Gonorrhea
• Mucous membrane inflammation, 
particularly in the urinary tract
• Prostatitis
See Materia Medica  page 160
CURARE
Strychnos toxifera
Key uses
• Heaviness
• Numbness
• Piercing pains
• Progressive muscular paralysis  
and impaired reflex action
• Weakness
See Materia Medica  page 168

•291 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
CYCLAMEN
Cyclamen europaeum
Key uses
• Extreme indigestion that is aggravated  
by eating fats
• Menstrual problems
See Materia Medica  page 140DIGITALIS
Digitalis purpurea
Key uses
• Heart and circulatory disorders
• Liver problems, especially in conjunction 
with heart problems
See Materia Medica  pages 140–41
See also  page 186
DULCAMARA
Solanum dulcamara
Key uses
• Colds and coughs
• Diarrhea
• Hay fever and asthma
• Head and facial pain
• Joint pain
• Skin conditions
See Materia Medica  page 62
See also  pages 194 , 226–27DROSERA
Drosera rotundifolia
Key uses
• Behavioral problems, especially  
in children
• Deep, violent, spasmodic coughs, 
especially whooping cough
• Growing pains in children, such as stiff 
ankles and pains in the joints and bones
See Materia Medica  page 141
See also  pages 250–51
EQUISETUM
Equisetum hyemale
Key uses
• Bed-wetting in children during 
nightmares or other dreams
• Painful irritation of the bladder
See Materia Medica  page 142
See also  pages 248–49ELAPS
Micrurus corallinus
Key uses
• Hemorrhaging or other discharges 
characterized by black blood
• Right-sided paralysis after a stroke
See Materia Medica  page 155DIOSCOREA
Dioscorea villosa
Key uses
• Neuralgic and colicky pains, especially  
in the gastrointestinal system
• Renal colic, in men, associated with 
kidney stones, sharp pains radiating 
down the testicles and legs, and cold, 
clammy perspiration
See Materia Medica  page 141
ECHINACEA
Echinacea angustifolia
Key uses
• Abscesses, boils, and carbuncles
• Animal and insect bites and stings
• Cancer
• Diphtheria
• Septicemia
• Swollen glands
See Materia Medica  page 141
EUPATORIUM PER.
Eupatorium perfoliatum
Key uses
• Influenza or malarial fever accompanied 
by pain in the limbs
See Materia Medica  page 142

292 •
EUPHORBIUM
Euphorbia resinifera ‘Berger’
Key uses
• Burning pain in the bones with a weak 
and dislocated feeling in the limbs, and 
sharp, cramping pains and weakness in 
the joints
• Itching, burning skin, possibly with 
warts, slow-healing ulcers, or yellow 
blistering due to erysipelas
See Materia Medica  page 142A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
EUPHRASIA
Euphrasia officinalis
Key uses
• Colds
• Conjunctivitis
• Eye problems after an injury
• Hay fever
• Irritation in the eyes with a heightened 
sensitivity to light
See Materia Medica  pages 142–43
See also  pages 220–21 , 224–25
FERRUM PHOS.
Ferrum phosphoricum
Key uses
• Colds
• Digestive disorders
• Earaches
• Fever
• Poor circulation
• Raynaud’s disease
• Respiratory illnesses
• Urogenital problems
See Materia Medica  page 82
See also  pages 224–25FERRUM MET.
Ferrum metallicum
Key uses
• Anemia
• Back and joint pain
• Circulatory problems
• Digestive disorders
• Headaches
• Severe fatigue
See Materia Medica  page 81
GELSEMIUM
Gelsemium sempervirens
Key uses
• Acute influenza and sore throat
• Hay fever
• Paralysis, linked with phobias, exam 
nerves, stage fright, and other 
anticipatory terrors
See Materia Medica  page 144
See also  pages 211 , 224–25 , 226–27 ,  
254–55FRAXINUS
Fraxinus americana
Key uses
• Fibroids and other tumors
• Heavy , painful menstruation
• Uterine problems, such as a uterus that  
is relaxed in tone or prolapsed
See Materia Medica  page 143
See also  page 199FAGOPYRUM
Fagopyrum esculentum
Key uses
• Eczema and itching skin
• Heart complaints associated with visibly 
pulsing arteries
See Materia Medica  page 143
FLUORIC AC.
Acidum hydrofluoricum
Key uses
• Alopecia
• Bone conditions
• Discharges from the ears and nose
• Nail conditions
• Sexual problems
• Tooth decay
• Varicose veins
See Materia Medica  page 69
See also  page 209
GLONOINUM
Trinitrum
Key uses
• Heat exhaustion
• High blood pressure, especially  
in the elderly
• Menopausal hot flashes
• Severe headaches, accompanied by great 
confusion and a compulsion to hold the 
head and squeeze it
See Materia Medica  page 170
See also  page 275

•293 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
GNAPHALIUM
Gnaphalium polycephalum
Key uses
• Foul-smelling diarrhea with colic
• Intense sciatic pain alternating with  
or followed by numbness
• Joint pains and rheumatic complaints
• Lumbago with numbness and heaviness 
in the affected area
• Scanty menstrual periods
See Materia Medica  page 144GRANATUM
Punica granatum
Key uses
• Expulsion of tapeworms
See Materia Medica  pages 160–61
GUAIACUM
Guaiacum officinale
Key uses
• Arthritic or rheumatic joint pains, 
especially in the wrists
• Arthritic pains associated with swelling, 
tension, and tautness in the muscles that 
is better for cold
• Growing pains
See Materia Medica  page 145GRATIOLA
Gratiola officinalis
Key uses
• Gastrointestinal problems, such as cramps 
in the pit of the stomach
• High sex drive, frequent masturbation, 
and nymphomania
• Migraines
• Sciatica
See Materia Medica  pages 144–45
HELLEBORUS
Helleborus niger
Key uses
• Brain inflammation
• Depression
• Digestive disorders
• Headaches
• Nervous system disorders
See Materia Medica  page 55HEKLA
Hekla lava
Key uses
• Bone disorders, such as exostosis  
and osteitis
• Glandular swellings, especially  
in the neck
• Osteosarcoma and sarcoma, especially  
in the jaw, head, or legs
• Toothaches
See Materia Medica  page 145
See also  page 209GRAPHITES
Graphites
Key uses
• Anxiety and shyness
• Digestive disorders
• Erectile problems
• Eye, ear, and nose conditions
• Menstrual problems
• Skin and nail conditions
See Materia Medica  page 83
See also  pages 194 , 195, 200, 201, 211, 
212, 226–27 , 240–41
HAMAMELIS
Hamamelis virginiana
Key uses
• Hemorrhaging, such as heavy  
menstrual periods or nosebleeds
• Hemorrhoids
• Varicose veins
See Materia Medica  page 145
See also  pages 230–31 , 238–39
HELONIAS
Chamaelirium luteum
Key uses
• Edema following uterine prolapse
• Suppressed menstruation
• Women’s problems accompanied by 
severe fatigue
See Materia Medica  page 135

294 •
HEPAR SULPH.
Hepar sulphuris calcareum
Key uses
• Colds and catarrh
• Coughs and croup
• Digestive disorders
• Skin conditions
• Sore throat
• Oversensitivity
See Materia Medica  page 84
See also  pages 194 , 222–23 , 226–27 ,  
240–41 , 250–51A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
HYDRASTIS
Hydrastis canadensis
Key uses
• Abnormal taste in the mouth
• Cancers of the liver, colon, or breast
• Catarrh
• Sinusitis
• Sore throat
• Stomach problems
See Materia Medica  pages 147–48
See also  pages 226–27
HYPERICUM
Hypericum perforatum
Key uses
• Injuries or wounds that feel more painful 
than they appear
• Nervous pains in phantom limbs  
after amputation
• Pain relief following operations, 
accidents, puncture wounds, and  
animal bites
• Tetanus prevention
• Toothaches or discomfort after  
dental treatment
See Materia Medica  page 148HYOSCYAMUS
Hyoscyamus niger
Key uses
• Behavioral problems
• Coughs
• Delirium
• Paranoia
• Hypersexuality
See Materia Medica  page 56
See also  page 187
IPECAC.
Cephaelis ipecacuanha
Key uses
• Asthma
• Coughs and wheezing
• Gynecological problems
• Migraines
• Morning sickness
• Nausea and vomiting
See Materia Medica  page 45
See also  pages 181 , 236–37 , 262–63IODUM
Iodum
Key uses
• Blockages in the eustachian tube
• Coughs
• Eating disorders
• Heat intolerance
• Overactive metabolism
• Prostate problems
• Respiratory illnesses
• Rheumatoid arthritis
See Materia Medica  page 86
See also  pages 197 , 202, 222–23HYDROCOTYLE
Centella asiatica
Key uses
• Excessive skin thickening, swelling,  
and distortion, like that occurring  
in elephantiasis
• Leprosy with no ulceration
• Lupus
• Psoriasis with thickening and hardening 
of the affected area
See Materia Medica  pages 134–35
IGNATIA
Ignatia amara
Key uses
• Absent periods
• Digestive disorders
• Grief and distress
• Headaches
• Insomnia
• Phobias and fainting
• Sore throat
See Materia Medica  page 57
See also  pages 211 , 212, 213, 234–35 , 
244–45 , 256–57 , 260–61 , 275
IRIDIUM MET.
Iridium metallicum
Key uses
• Exhaustion and anemia following  
a bout of illness
• Lameness or partial paralysis, particularly 
in the elderly
• Muscle pain and stiffness, with tender, 
swollen joints
• Neuralgic and sciatic nerve pains
• Suppurating abscesses in the armpits
See Materia Medica  page 148

•295 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
IRIS
Iris versicolor
Key uses
• Digestive disorders, such as nausea, 
severe diarrhea, and cholera
• Headaches and migraines
See Materia Medica  page 148JUNIPER
Juniperus communis
Key uses
• Menstrual pain
• Uterine muscle stimulant
• Water retention, possibly with  
advanced kidney disease
See Materia Medica  pages 148–49
KALI. BROM.
Kalium bromatum
Key uses
• Excessive sexual needs or  
impotence in men
• Ovarian cysts, tumors, or fibroids
• Psychosis, mania, paranoia, autism,  
or retardation
• Skin complaints, such as rosacea
• Stroke, epilepsy , or other seizures
See Materia Medica  page 149
See also  pages 193 , 240–41KALI. BICH.
Kalium bichromicum
Key uses
• Catarrh and sinusitis
• Glue ear
• Headaches
• Indigestion
• Joint pains
• Rheumatoid arthritis
• Skin conditions
• Sore throat, coughs, and croup
See Materia Medica  page 87
See also  pages 197 , 226–27 , 250–51
KALI. MUR.
Kalium chloratum
Key uses
• Blockages of the eustachian tube
• Cancer
• Chronic catarrh, nasal congestion,  
and nosebleeds
• Earaches in or behind the ears
• Inflamed membranes or joints
• Sore throat
• Tonsillitis or swollen throat glands
See Materia Medica  page 150
See also  pages 209 , 222–23 , 226–27KALI. IOD.
Kalium iodatum
Key uses
• Chronic catarrh or recurring sinusitis
• Copious and watery discharges, possibly 
with chronic allergic rhinitis
• Swellings, abscesses, or atrophy  
of the glands
See Materia Medica  page 150KALI. ARS.
Kalium arsenicosum
Key uses
• Asthma
• Chronic skin conditions, such as  
eczema, psoriasis, acne, or ulcers
• Skin cancer
• Varicose veins on legs that have  
become ulcerous
• Anxiety about health
See Materia Medica  page 149
KALI. CARB.
Kalium carbonicum
Key uses
• Asthma
• Coughs, whooping cough, and colds
• Incontinence
• Insomnia
• Joint or back pains, and osteoarthritis
• Kidney disorders
• Palpitations
See Materia Medica  page 88
See also  pages 181 , 186, 196, 205,  
250–51 , 268–69
KALI. NIT.
Kalium nitricum
Key uses
• Asthma, croup, or bronchitis
• Nasal polyps, chronic irritation,  
catarrh, and sinusitis
See Materia Medica  page 150

296 •
KALI. PHOS.
Kalium phosphoricum
Key uses
• Abnormal discharges
• Back pain
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Excess perspiration
• Hunger pains
• Insomnia
See Materia Medica  page 89A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
KALI. SULPH.
Kalium sulphuricum
Key uses
• Asthma
• Chronic catarrh, or mucus in the nose, 
larynx, bronchi, or ears
• Skin conditions, such as eczema, 
psoriasis, ringworm, glue ear, polyps,  
oily skin problems, and skin cancer
See Materia Medica  pages 150–51
LAC CAN.
Lac caninum
Key uses
• Breast problems
• Hypersensitivity
• Phobias
• Throat infections
• Vaginal bleeding and discharge
See Materia Medica  page 108KREOSOTUM
Kreosotum
Key uses
• Bleeding between menstrual cycles
• Candidiasis
• Disorders of the mucous membranes, 
especially in the vagina, cervix,  
and uterus
• Offensive-smelling menstrual flows  
that burn the skin and cause itching  
and swelling
• Nausea in pregnancy
See Materia Medica  page 151
See also pages 200 , 248–49
LACHNANTHES
Lachnanthes tinctoria
Key uses
• Circulatory system disorders related  
to the head and chest
• Right-sided headaches accompanied  
by great chilliness
• T uberculosis
See Materia Medica  page 151LACHESIS
Lachesis muta
Key uses
• Heart disorders
• Poor circulation and varicose veins
• Sore throat
• Spasms and tremors
• Women’s health
• Jealousy
• Phobias
See Materia Medica  page 109 
See also pages 179 , 186, 193, 199, 201, 
212, 213, 258–59KALMIA
Kalmia latifolia
Key uses
• General muscle pain
• Heart disease
• Severe, sharp neuralgic pains in the 
muscles and joints
See Materia Medica  page 151
LAC DEFL.
Lac vaccinum defloratum
Key uses
• Anemia and weakness following  
chronic disease
• Chronic liver disease
• Diabetes
• Headaches, especially those associated 
with menstruation
• Water retention related to heart disease
See Materia Medica  page 151
LATHYRUS
Lathyrus sativus
Key uses
• Multiple sclerosis
• Pain in the lower back
• Total loss of sexual function
• Tremors
• Urinary incontinence
• Weakness and heaviness in the aftermath 
of influenza and other viral illnesses
See Materia Medica  page 151

•297 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
LATRODECTUS MAC.
Latrodectus mactans
Key uses
• Heart problems, especially angina
• Restlessness, especially associated with 
acute angina attacks
See Materia Medica  page 152
See also page 185LEDUM
Ledum palustre
Key uses
• Black eyes and other eye injuries
• Bleeding into the eye chamber after  
an iridectomy
• Cuts and grazes
• Insect stings
• Open wounds, especially severe ones 
with bruising, puffy , purplish skin
• Rheumatic pains
See Materia Medica  page 152
See also page 196
LOBELIA
Lobelia inflata
Key uses
• Breathlessness and asthma accompanied 
by great anxiety
• Nausea with giddiness
• Vomiting with profuse perspiration
See Materia Medica  page 152LITHIUM CARB.
Lithium carbonicum
Key uses
• Arthritic conditions
• Bones and muscles that are sore
• Distorted, swollen, sore, tender,  
and red joints
• Gout
• Hip pain
• Stiff limbs
See Materia Medica  page 152
LYCOPUS
Lycopus virginicus
Key uses
• Overactivity of the thyroid gland, 
especially during menopause
• Respiratory complaints in conjunction 
with heart problems
• Weak heart, erratic pulse, or heart disease
See Materia Medica  page 153LYCOPODIUM
Lycopodium clavatum
Key uses
• Anxiety
• Chest infections
• Digestive disorders
• Urogenital problems
See Materia Medica  page 59
See also pages 182 , 191, 195, 196, 197, 
200, 202, 203, 209, 211, 212, 218–19 , 
236–37 , 242–43 , 244–45 , 264–65 , 266–67LILIUM
Lilium tigrinum
Key uses
• Depression
• Heart problems, such as angina
• Urinary disorders
• Women’s health
See Materia Medica  page 58
See also page 185
LUPULUS
Humulus lupulus
Key uses
• Burning in the urethra
• Delirium associated with drunkenness
• Greasy , clammy , profuse perspiration
• Hangovers with nausea, dizziness,  
and headaches
• Overexcitability
• Rheumatic pains
• T witching, nervous tremors
See Materia Medica  page 146
LYSSIN
Lyssin hydrophobinum
Key uses
• Choking sensation when swallowing, 
with profuse saliva
• Excessive sexual energy
• Fear, irritability , and a desire to pass 
stools or urinate, triggered by sight or 
sound of running water
• Nervous system, throat, and sexual organ 
disorders, such as uterine prolapse
• Pain during sexual intercourse
See Materia Medica  page 153

298 •
MAG. CARB.
Magnesium carbonicum
Key uses
• Acidity in the digestive system
• Constipation
• Diarrhea
• Exhaustion or chronic fatigue  
syndrome with swollen glands,  
lax muscles, and susceptibility  
to hernias
• Sensitivity to, and fear of, violence
See Materia Medica  page 153A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
MAG. MUR.
Magnesium chloratum
Key uses
• Children who are prone to digestive 
problems and whose parents  
regularly argue
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Digestive complaints, such as nausea, 
indigestion, and constipation
• Restlessness in bed
• Swollen glands
See Materia Medica  page 153
MALANDRINUM
Malandrinum
Key uses
• Antidote to any adverse effects  
of a smallpox vaccination
• Dry , scaly , itchy skin with cracks  
or fissures
• Greasy , pustular eruptions
• Rough, unhealthy-looking skin
See Materia Medica  page 154MAG. SULPH.
Magnesium sulphuricum
Key uses
• Dry skin
• Exhaustion or chronic fatigue
• Nausea
• Sleep problems
• Urinary disorders, possibly with  
digestive, skin, or menstrual problems 
and awkward limb movements
See Materia Medica  page 154
MANGANUM MET.
Manganum metallicum
Key uses
• Earaches
• Extremely sensitive bones, especially  
in children
• Great sensitivity to noise and wind
• Temporary reduction in hearing
• Tinnitus
See Materia Medica  page 154MANDRAGORA
Mandragora officinarum
Key uses
• Abdominal pain
• Congestive headaches
• Limbs that feel heavy , bruised,  
or sore
• Sciatica
See Materia Medica  page 154MAG. PHOS.
Magnesium phosphoricum
Key uses
• Abdominal, menstrual, and  
other cramps
• Colic
• Earaches
• Headaches
• Neuralgia
• Toothaches
See Materia Medica  page 90
See also pages 246–47 , 256–57
MANCINELLA
Hippomane mancinella
Key uses
• Confused feelings about sexuality 
connected with fear of being  
possessed by evil spirits
• Fear of insanity and loss of mind control
• Obsessive behavior, even leading  
to a psychological breakdown
• Skin problems, such as dermatitis
See Materia Medica  page 145
MEDORRHINUM
Medorrhinum
Key uses
• Genital warts and herpes
• Rhinitis, sinusitis, and asthma
• Testicular pain
• Urinary tract infections
• Women’s health
• Aggression
• Peptic ulcer
See Materia Medica  page 110
See also pages 197 , 200

•299 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
MELILOTUS
Melilotus officinalis
Key uses
• Circulatory problems
• Throbbing headaches
See Materia Medica  pages 154–55MERC. CORR.
Hydrargyrum bichloratum
Key uses
• Anxiety and restlessness
• Colitis
• Delirium and stupor during illness
• Dysentery
• Swollen glands
• Throat complaints, such as  
ulcerated tonsils
See Materia Medica  page 146
See also page 190
MERC. IOD. FLAV .
Hydrargyrum iodatum 
flavatum
Key uses
• Ear infections affecting the right side
• Right-sided complaints, especially  
throat infections such as pharyngitis  
and tonsillitis
See Materia Medica  page 147MERC. DULC.
Hydrargyrum chloratum
Key uses
• Agitation
• Apprehension
• Catarrhal inflammation in the ears  
and eustachian tube, leading to  
deafness and glue ear
• Restlessness
See Materia Medica  page 146
MERC. SULPH.
Hydrargyrum sulphas
Key uses
• Digestive disorders, sometimes combined 
with respiratory complaints
• Respiratory difficulties, such as pain  
in the chest and rapid breathing
See Materia Medica  page 147MERC. SOL.
Hydrargyrum metallicum
Key uses
• Catarrh and colds
• Eye and ear infections
• Fever
• Mouth and throat conditions
• Osteoarthritis
• Thrush
See Materia Medica  page 85
See also pages 196 , 200, 232–33 , 250–51 , 
252–53 , 254–55 , 264–65 , 268–69MERC. CYAN.
Hydrargyrum cyanatum
Key uses
• Acute infectious diseases with  
rapidly sinking strength and  
a tendency to hemorrhage
• Throat and mouth conditions, such  
as diphtheria and tonsillitis
See Materia Medica  pages 146–47
MERC. IOD. RUBER.
Hydrargyrum biiodatum
Key uses
• Ulcerated sore throat with swollen glands 
and stiff muscles in the neck and throat, 
especially on the left side
See Materia Medica  page 146
MEZEREUM
Daphne mezereum
Key uses
• Anxiety-related digestive system disorders
• Neuralgic pains around the teeth or face, 
and pains in the long bones
• Shingles affecting the chest
• Suppurating skin complaints, such  
as eczema and psoriasis, particularly 
affecting the scalp
See Materia Medica  page 140
See also page 194

300 •
MILLEFOLIUM
Achillea millefolium
Key uses
• Bleeding from injuries, internal bleeding, 
or menstrual irregularities
• Congestion in the ears, eyes, nose,  
and chest
• Profuse, painful uterine bleeding 
following childbirth or an abortion
• Severe colicky pain, diarrhea, or painful 
varicose veins, during pregnancy
• Sore nipples and suppressed breast milk 
after childbirth
See Materia Medica  page 118A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
MOSCHUS
Moschus moschiferus
Key uses
• Fainting triggered by the slightest 
excitement or by eating, menstruation,  
or heart disease
• General coldness or a chill in a specific 
area of the body
• Heightened physical and mental tension, 
which may cause spasms, twitches, and 
seizures in the muscles
• Hiccups
See Materia Medica  page 155
MYGALE LAS.
Mygale lasiodora
Key uses
• Chorea
• T witching, convulsive movements, 
possibly accompanied by nausea, dimmed 
vision, and heart palpitations
See Materia Medica  page 156MURIATIC AC.
Acidum hydrochloricum
Key uses
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Weakness or physical collapse after 
feverish illness, such as mononucleosis  
or typhoid
See Materia Medica  page 119
NAT. CARB.
Natrum carbonicum
Key uses
• Colds, catarrh, and headaches
• Depression
• Digestive disorders
• Exhaustion
• Infertility
• Phobias
• Skin conditions and allergies
See Materia Medica  page 91
See also pages 203 , 207, 211, 212NAT. ARS.
Natrum arsenicum
Key uses
• Complaints associated with the chest, 
involving breathlessness, a dry , hacking 
cough, great sensitivity to smoke or dust, 
and restlessness
See Materia Medica  page 156MUREX
Murex purpurea
Key uses
• Digestive problems in women
• Intense premenstrual and menstrual pain
• Painful breasts, perhaps developing 
benign tumors
See Materia Medica  page 155
NAJA
Naja naja
Key uses
• Angina
• Erratic pulse
• Valvular lesions
• Violent palpitations
See Materia Medica  page 156
NAT. FLUOR.
Natrum fluoricum
Key uses
• Aversion to sour-tasting things
• Cold sweats in the armpits
• Desire for alcohol
• Right-sided complaints
See Materia Medica  page 156

•301 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
NAT. MUR.
Natrum chloratum
Key uses
• Colds and catarrh
• Digestive disorders
• Headaches and migraines
• Mouth and throat conditions
• Skin conditions
• Women’s health
See Materia Medica  page 92
See also pages 179 , 186, 196, 205, 207, 
212, 213, 218–19 , 220–21 , 224–25 ,  
226–27 , 232–33 , 242–43NAT. PHOS.
Natrum phosphoricum
Key uses
• Digestive disorders characterized  
by excess acidity and sour discharges
• Failure to thrive, in bottle-fed babies
See Materia Medica  pages 156–57
NUX MOSCH.
Myristica fragrans
Key uses
• Chronic constipation with fullness  
and bloating in the abdomen
• Confusion, dizziness, and fainting
• Dry tongue that sticks to the roof  
of the mouth
• Great drowsiness
• Loss of coordination
• Unquenchable thirst
See Materia Medica  page 156NITRIC AC.
Acidum nitricum
Key uses
• Anal fissures
• Cancer
• Candidiasis
• Catarrh
• Hemorrhoids
• Mouth ulcers
• Skin conditions
• Warts
See Materia Medica  page 70
See also pages 200 , 209
ONOSMODIUM
Onosmodium virginianum
Key uses
• Exhaustion, characterized by trembling,  
a sensation of heaviness, and lack of 
coordination, and possibly combined 
with diminished or absent sexual desire
• Eye strain
See Materia Medica  page 158OLEANDER
Nerium oleander
Key uses
• Cradle cap
• Dandruff
• Eczema
• Psoriasis
See Materia Medica  page 157
See also page 194NAT. SULPH.
Natrum sulphuricum
Key uses
• Asthma
• Headaches due to injury or those 
accompanied by increased salivation  
or strong intolerance to light
• Liver conditions, such as hepatitis  
and gallstones, colicky abdominal  
pains, and jaundice
• Severe or suicidal depression
• Diarrhea with sudden urge  
in the morning
See Materia Medica  page 157
NUX VOMICA
Strychnos nux-vomica
Key uses
• Asthma
• Colds and influenza
• Cystitis
• Digestive disorders
• Headaches
• Irritability and insomnia
• Menstrual or pregnancy problems
See Materia Medica  page 63
See also pages 186 , 187, 189, 190, 200, 
202, 207, 212, 213, 218–19 , 224–25 , 
234–35 , 236–37 , 238–39 , 244–45 ,  
260–61 , 262–63 , 268–69 , 275
OPIUM
Papaver somniferum
Key uses
• Constipation
• Delirium tremens
• Grief
• Insomnia and narcolepsy
• Post-stroke paralysis
• Shock and injury
See Materia Medica  page 60
See also pages 187 , 213

 302 •
ORIGANUM
Origanum majorana
Key uses
• Women’s sexual problems involving  
an obsession with sexual thoughts, 
restlessness, and swollen, itchy ,  
and painful breasts
See Materia Medica  page 158A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
OXALIC AC.
Acidum oxalicum
Key uses
• Angina with palpitations that are worse 
for lying down
• Pain in the spermatic cord
• Throbbing, crushing pain in the testes
See Materia Medica  page 120
PANAX GINSENG
Panax pseudoginseng
Key uses
• Fatigue as a result of excessive  
sexual intercourse
• Paralytic weakness
• Rheumatic pain
• Sciatica
See Materia Medica  page 159PALLADIUM MET.
Palladium metallicum
Key uses
• Abdominal infections
• Head and limb pains accompanied  
by irritability and impatience
• Ovarian pains and cysts, especially in the 
right side of the body
• Prolapsed or displaced uterus
• Sprained limbs
• Tired, cold, or tense limbs
See Materia Medica  page 158
PETROLEUM
Petroleum rectificatum
Key uses
• Chilblains
• Diarrhea and nausea
• Eczema and psoriasis
• Migraines
• Travel sickness
See Materia Medica  page 93
See also page 195PASSIFLORA
Passiflora incarnata
Key uses
• Alcoholism
• Insomnia accompanied by hemorrhoids, 
pain in the coccyx, or discomfort during 
or just before menstruation
• Screaming children
• Whooping cough
See Materia Medica  page 159PAEONIA
Paeonia officinalis
Key uses
• Nightmares, especially those  
involving ghosts
• Rectal and anal problems, such as  
fissures and hemorrhoids
See Materia Medica  page 158
PAREIRA
Pareira brava
Key uses
• Kidney colic
• Prostate disorders, such as enlarged 
prostate glands
• Severe pain in the penis
• Urinary disorders involving painful 
urination, and severe pains on the left 
side of the lower back, and in the penis
See Materia Medica  page 159
PHOSPHORIC AC.
Acidum phosphoricum
Key uses
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Diabetes
• Diarrhea
• Exam nerves
• Exhaustion
• Grief or shock
• Growing pains
• Headaches
See Materia Medica  page 71
See also pages 191 , 205, 213

•303 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
PHOSPHORUS
Phosphorus
Key uses
• Bleeding
• Burning pains
• Digestive disorders
• Palpitations
• Poor circulation
• Respiratory illnesses
• Phobias
See Materia Medica  page 94
See also pages 179 , 181, 182, 183, 186, 
190, 191, 199, 209, 211, 213, 228–29 , 
234–35 , 236–37 , 244–45 , 266–67PHYTOLACCA
Phytolacca americana
Key uses
• Breast problems
• Inflamed neck glands and tonsils
• Mononucleosis
• Mumps
• Psoriasis
• Dental pain
See Materia Medica  page 159
See also pages 195 , 201, 252–53 , 254–55
PLATINA
Platinum metallicum
Key uses
• Depression
• Head and facial pains
• Menstrual problems
• Numbness and cramps
• Oversensitivity of the female genitalia
See Materia Medica  page 95
See also page 212PLANTAGO
Plantago major
Key uses
• Bed-wetting problems
• Earaches
• Toothaches
See Materia Medica  page 160
PSORINUM
Psorinum
Key uses
• Depression
• Diarrhea
• Ear and eye infections
• Phobias
• Respiratory illnesses
• Skin problems, such as rosacea and 
severe eczema
See Materia Medica  page 111
See also pages 193 , 194, 211, 268–69PODOPHYLLUM
Podophyllum peltatum
Key uses
• Abdominal cramps
• Diarrhea
• Gastroenteritis
• Liver problems
• Ovarian pain
See Materia Medica  page 160PICRIC AC.
Acidum picrinicum
Key uses
• Indifference with mental and physical 
fatigue, which may develop into  
actual paralysis
See Materia Medica  page 120
PLUMBUM MET.
Plumbum metallicum
Key uses
• Constipation
• Diabetes
• Dupuytren’s contracture
• Multiple sclerosis
• Muscle weakness
• Neurological conditions
• Vaginismus
See Materia Medica  page 96
See also pages 179 , 191, 260–61
PULSATILLA
Pulsatilla pratensis subsp . 
Nigricans
Key uses
• Colds and coughs
• Digestive disorders
• Eye infections
• Sinusitis
• Women’s health
See Materia Medica  page 61
See also pages 183 , 189, 196, 201, 202, 
207, 212, 213, 218–19 , 220–21 , 222–23 , 
226–27 , 228–29 , 230–31 , 234–35 , 236–37 , 
240–41 , 252–53 , 256–57 , 262–63 , 275

304 •
PYROGEN.
Pyrogenium
Key uses
• Fevers—for example, during menstruation
• Genital tract infections following 
childbirth or an abortion
• Infections
• Influenza
• Pelvic infections in women
• Septic states, such as abscesses that  
never fully heal
See Materia Medica  page 161A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
QUERCUS
Quercus robur
Key uses
• Acute alcohol poisoning
• Chronic spleen disorders, such as an 
enlarged spleen due to recurrent malaria 
or alcoholism
• Recurrent gout
• Reduction in alcoholic intake
See Materia Medica  page 161
RAPHANUS
Raphanus sativus var. niger
Key uses
• Extreme abdominal distension
• Postoperative pain
See Materia Medica  page 162RANUNCULUS BULB.
Ranunculus bulbosus
Key uses
• Muscle, joint, and skin problems, 
possibly occurring simultaneously
• Herpes zoster (shingles)
See Materia Medica  page 161
RHUS TOX.
Rhus toxicodendron
Key uses
• Musculoskeletal problems, such as 
cramps, sprains, strains, restless legs, 
rheumatic or arthritic pain, and sciatica
• Skin conditions, such as chicken pox, 
shingles, herpes, rosacea, eczema, and 
diaper rash
• Skin eruptions with blisters
See Materia Medica  pages 162–63
See also pages 187 , 193, 194, 197,  
218–19 , 230–31 , 246–47 , 252–53 , 273RHODODENDRON
Rhododendron chrysanthum
Key uses
• Hydrocele
• Joint problems, such as gout, arthritis,  
or rheumatic pain
See Materia Medica  page 162
See also pages 264–65RADIUM BROM.
Radium bromatum
Key uses
• Acute rheumatic pains
• Conditions arising from radiation 
poisoning or treatment, such as  
ulcers from X-ray burns
• Neuralgic pains
• Psoriasis, eczema, dermatitis, acne 
rosacea, nevi, or moles
• Skin cancer
See Materia Medica  page 161
RHEUM
Rheum officinale
Key uses
• Chronic diarrhea, with yellow or  
green, frothy or fermented stools that  
are sour-smelling
• Colicky pain, often accompanied by 
shivering and an urge to pass stools
• Nausea
• Teething
See Materia Medica  page 162
RHUS VEN.
Rhus venenata
Key uses
• Flaking, itching skin, possibly with 
patches of thickening or hardening,  
and a tendency for the skin to crack
See Materia Medica  page 163

•305 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
RICINUS
Ricinus communis
Key uses
• Diarrhea, especially in children
• Nausea and profuse vomiting
See Materia Medica  page 163RUMEX CRISPUS
Rumex crispus
Key uses
• Asthma
• Whooping cough, dry , tickling coughs, 
croup, or other hard, hacking coughs
See Materia Medica  page 163
SABAL
Serenoa repens
Key uses
• Genitourinary disorders, such as frequent 
urination, urine retention due to prostate 
enlargement, gonorrhea, or inflammation 
of the seminal tube
• Sexual and general fatigue
See Materia Medica  page 166
See also page 202SABADILLA
Schoenocaulon officinale
Key uses
• Inflammation of the respiratory mucous 
membranes, possibly due to hay fever, 
asthma, tonsillitis, or a cold
See Materia Medica  page 164
SAMBUCUS
Sambucus nigra
Key uses
• Asthma
• Bronchitis
• Croup
• Whooping cough
See Materia Medica  page 164SALICYLIC AC.
Acidum salicylicum
Key uses
• Ear problems, especially tinnitus,  
vertigo, and progressive deafness
• Severe headaches
• Ulceration on the mucous membranes, 
such as mouth ulcers
• Weakness
See Materia Medica  page 120
See also pages 222–23RUTA
Ruta graveolens
Key uses
• Chronic arthritis
• Eyestrain
• Sprains and strains, especially repetitive 
strain injuries
• Stiff, sore lower back or sciatica
See Materia Medica  pages 163–64
See also pages 220–21 , 273
SABINA
Juniperus sabina
Key uses
• Genital warts
• Infertility
• Itching, burning external genitalia
• Phimosis, swelling of the upper penis, 
and gonorrhea
• Uterine problems, such as pale red, 
clotting hemorrhages
See Materia Medica  page 149
See also page 203
SANGUINARIA
Sanguinaria canadensis
Key uses
• Asthma
• Hay fever
• Migraine
See Materia Medica  page 164

306 •
SANICULA
Aqua sanicula
Key uses
• Digestive symptoms involving bloating, 
sour belches, and an urge to pass stools 
after eating
• Low vitality due to slow digestion  
and undernourishment
• Menstrual disorders and vaginitis
See Materia Medica  page 125A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
SARSAPARILLA
Smilax officinalis
Key uses
• Urinary tract problems, such as cystitis 
characterized by a constant urge to 
urinate, pain as urination ends, and 
possibly blood in the urine
See Materia Medica  page 166
SECALE
Secale cornutum
Key uses
• Flows of watery blood between  
menstrual periods
• Hypercontraction of the muscles  
in the uterus
• Menstrual cramps
• Puerperal sepsis
• Uterine bleeding
• Weak contractions during labor
• Circulatory problems
See Materia Medica  page 165SCUTELLARIA
Scutellaria laterifolia
Key uses
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Headaches with possible dizziness, 
twitching muscles, and sensitivity to light
• Nervous exhaustion, possibly as a result 
of illness, continuous, tiring work,  
or overstudying
See Materia Medica  page 165
SENEGA
Polygala senega
Key uses
• Chest and catarrhal conditions, such as 
bronchitis, tuberculosis (especially in the 
elderly), and coughs
See Materia Medica  page 160SENECIO
Senecio aureus
Key uses
• Appetite loss
• Bleeding in congested or  
inflamed kidneys
• Bleeding in the lungs or the throat
• Excitability
• Insomnia
• Menstrual problems
• Nosebleeds
See Materia Medica  page 165SCORPION
Scorpio europaeus
Key uses
• Great fears, especially those of driving 
and of accidents, rooted in the abdomen 
and possibly with sharp cramps  
below the ribs
See Materia Medica  page 164
SELENIUM MET.
Selenium metallicum
Key uses
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Great weakness, especially if the body 
temperature increases
• Multiple sclerosis
See Materia Medica  page 165
See also page 202
SEPIA
Sepia officinalis
Key uses
• Catarrh
• Digestive disorders
• Fatigue
• Headaches
• Poor circulation
• Skin conditions
• Women’s health
See Materia Medica  page 112
See also pages 186 , 195, 196, 199,  
203, 211, 212, 242–43 , 256–57 ,  
258–59 , 260–61

•307 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
SILICA
Silicea terra
Key uses
• Coughs
• Diabetes
• Digestive disorders
• Ear, nose, and throat problems
• Headaches
• Skin, tooth, nail, and bone conditions
See Materia Medica  page 97
See also pages 191 , 193, 196, 199, 201, 
209, 220–21SINAPIS
Brassica nigra
Key uses
• Catarrh
• Colds
• Hay fever
• Intense sneezing
• Pharyngitis
• Sweating
See Materia Medica  page 130
SPONGIA
Euspongia officinalis
Key uses
• Heart complaints involving palpitations 
and great exhaustion
• Upper respiratory tract infections
• Croup
See Materia Medica  page 143SPIGELIA
Spigelia anthelmia
Key uses
• Headaches or migraines
• Heart murmurs or valve disorders
• Neuralgic or rheumatic pains
• Palpitations
• Rheumatic heart disease or angina
• Sinus infections
See Materia Medica  page 167
See also pages 185 , 197, 268–69
STAPHISAGRIA
Delphinium staphisagria
Key uses
• Grief
• Headaches and toothaches
• Insomnia
• Joint pains
• Skin conditions, such as psoriasis
• Styes
• Urogenital problems, such as cystitis
See Materia Medica  page 54
See also pages 195 , 213, 220–21 , 260–61STANNUM MET.
Stannum metallicum
Key uses
• Exhaustion after chronic  
respiratory problems
• Nervous system disorders
• Serious respiratory infections, such  
as bronchitis or pneumonia
See Materia Medica  page 167SOLIDAGO
Solidago virgaurea
Key uses
• Fibroids
• Kidneys that feel distended, sore,  
aching, and tender
See Materia Medica  pages 166–67
SQUILLA
Urginea maritima var. rubra
Key uses
• Chronic respiratory conditions, such  
as bronchitis (in the elderly), pleurisy , 
coughs, and asthma
• Measles in children
See Materia Medica  page 170
STICTA
Lobaria pulmonaria
Key uses
• Chronic catarrh that is difficult to expel 
and causes stuffiness, a dull, heavy feeling 
in the head, and a dry , tickly throat
• Pneumonia
• Respiratory problems associated with hay 
fever or other allergic reactions, influenza, 
or bronchitis
See Materia Medica  page 152

308 •
STRAMONIUM
Datura stramonium
Key uses
• Asthma
• Bronchitis
• Chorea
• Fever
• Phobias
• Violence and mania
See Materia Medica  page 53
See also page 211A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
STRONTIUM CARB.
Strontium carbonicum
Key uses
• Acute conditions following an operation 
or injury , such as fainting, exhaustion, 
chills, violent palpitations, and collapse
• Heart conditions, including angina, 
phlebitis, and terrible pains in the 
muscles and bones
See Materia Medica  page 167
SULPHURIC AC.
Acidum sulphuricum
Key uses
• Diabetes
• Extreme fatigue following an injury , 
concussion, or operation, especially  
if healing is slow
See Materia Medica  page 120SULPHUR IOD.
Strontium carbonicum
Key uses
• Chronic, itchy skin complaints, such as 
weeping eczema, acne, boils, pustules, 
urticaria, and lichen planus
See Materia Medica  page 168
TABACUM
Nicotiana tabacum
Key uses
• Acute digestive upsets, especially during 
pregnancy or chemotherapy
• Diarrhea or habitual constipation with 
rectal paralysis or spasms
• Severe nausea
• Travel-sickness
See Materia Medica  page 158
See also page 275SYPHILINUM
Syphilinum
Key uses
• Asthma
• Constipation
• Eye inflammation
• Headaches
• Menstrual problems and miscarriages
• Obsessive-compulsive behavior
• Ulcers
See Materia Medica  page 113SULPHUR
Sulphur
Key uses
• Digestive disorders
• Men’s health
• Respiratory illnesses
• Skin conditions
• Women’s health
See Materia Medica  page 99
See also pages 186 , 190, 194, 195, 196, 
201, 202, 207, 211, 212, 234–35 , 240–41 , 
242–43 , 246–47 , 252–53 , 258–59 ,  
260–61 , 268–69
SYMPHYTUM
Symphytum officinale
Key uses
• Abscesses in the psoas muscle
• Eye injuries
• Malignant bone tumors on the face
• Pricking pain from old injuries to the 
bone, cartilage, and periosteum
• Sprains and fractured or badly set bones
See Materia Medica  page 168
TARAXACUM
Taraxacum officinale
Key uses
• Digestive disorders
• Gallbladder inflammation
• Gallstones
• Headaches associated with  
gastric problems
• Urinary problems
See Materia Medica  page 168

•309 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
TARENTULA
Tarentula hispanica
Key uses
• Angina and heart disorders
• Cystitis
• Diabetes
• Mood swings
• Multiple sclerosis
• Restless limbs and chorea
• Women’s health
See Materia Medica  page 114
See also pages 179 , 191TARENTULA CUB.
Tarentula cubensis
Key uses
• Acute infections, such as diphtheria
• Pain relief during a slow death
• Septic conditions, such as carbuncles, 
septicemia, painful abscesses, ulcers,  
and gangrene
• Severe coughs, such as whooping cough, 
if there is great prostration
• Slow-developing fever
See Materia Medica  pages 168–69
TEUCRIUM MARUM
Teucrium marum
Key uses
• Fibroids in the uterus
• Fibrous tumors on the eyelids
• Gonorrhea
• Intestinal worms
• Polyps of the nose, ears, vagina,  
and rectum
See Materia Medica  page 169TEREBINTHUM
Terebinthina laricina
Key uses
• Burning pain and bleeding of the  
mucous membranes
• Inflammation of the urinary tract  
or kidneys, accompanied by 
hemorrhaging, water retention,  
and edema in the hands and feet
See Materia Medica  page 169
THLASPI
Capsella bursa-pastoris
Key uses
• Fibroids
• Hemorrhaging, especially during 
pregnancy , causing great pain
• Nosebleeds during pregnancy
• Violent cramping in the uterus, associated 
with hemorrhaging, between menstrual 
periods, during pregnancy , following 
labor, or after a miscarriage or abortion
See Materia Medica  page 133THERIDION
Theridion curassavicum
Key uses
• Acute sensitivity of the bones, nerves,  
and spine
• Diabetes
• Vertigo
See Materia Medica  page 169
See also pages 191 , 266–67TELLURIUM MET.
Tellurium metallicum
Key uses
• Back pains
• Eye and ear infections
• Skin conditions, such as psoriasis, 
ringworm, herpes, and eczema on the 
eyelids and behind the ears
See Materia Medica  page 169
THEA
Camellia sinensis
Key uses
• Extreme forms of behavior in children 
and adults, including irritability , mental 
restlessness, violent impulses, and 
psychiatric problems
• Indigestion
• Insomnia
• Overactive nervous system
• Palpitations or other heart problems
See Materia Medica  page 133
THUJA
Thuja occidentalis
Key uses
• Catarrh and sinusitis
• Headaches
• Menstrual problems
• Skin conditions
• Urogenital problems
• Depression
See Materia Medica  page 64
See also pages 202 , 212, 242–43

310 •
TUBERCULINUM
Tuberculinum Koch
Key uses
• Allergies
• Arthritic pains
• Colds
• Coughs and acute bronchitis
• Hay fever
• Neurotic behavior
See Materia Medica  page 115
See also page 207A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
URANIUM NIT.
Uranium nitricum
Key uses
• Diabetes with water retention and 
increased urination
• Digestive disorders, such as indigestion, 
bloating, and abdominal gas
• High blood pressure
• Kidney inflammation
• Liver problems
See Materia Medica  page 170
See also page 191
UVA URSI
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
Key uses
• Chronic bladder irritation
• Digestive, respiratory , or  
childbirth symptoms
• Enlarged prostate gland accompanying  
a urinary disorder
• Inflammation and stones in the kidneys
See Materia Medica  page 125USTILAGO
Ustilago zeae
Key uses
• Slow, congestive bleeding following 
miscarriage or labor
• Women’s problems, such as  
uterine fibroids
See Materia Medica  page 171
VERATRUM VIR.
Veratrum viride
Key uses
• Asthma
• Intense fever
• Manic behavior
• Pleurisy
• Pneumonia
• Puerperal fever
See Materia Medica  page 171VERATRUM ALB.
Veratrum album
Key uses
• Collapse
• Diarrhea
• Emotional problems
• Vomiting and nausea
• Weakness and fainting
See Materia Medica  page 65URTICA URENS
Urtica urens
Key uses
• Blistering, burning, stinging, red rashes 
caused by insect bites, stings, shellfish, 
and plants
• Burned, blistered skin
• Urticaria
See Materia Medica  page 170
See also pages 242–43 , 273
VALERIANA
Valeriana officinalis
Key uses
• Neuralgic pains, rapid pulse, and  
blood congestion in the head
See Materia Medica  page 171
VERBASCUM
Verbascum thapsiforme
Key uses
• Coughs
• Irritation and inflammation of the 
bladder, ears, or respiratory tract
• Neuralgic pains in the face and teeth
• Painful colds
See Materia Medica  page 171
See also pages 268–69

•311 A–Z QUICK REFERENCE
VESPA
Vespa crabro
Key uses
• Constipation
• Disorders of the female  
reproductive organs
• Mucous membrane problems
• Premenstrual depression
• Red, swollen skin complaints, such as 
boils, itchy bumps, weals, and lentil-
shaped spots
• Stinging, burning pains
See Materia Medica  page 171VIBURNUM
Viburnum opulus
Key uses
• False labor
• Painful menstruation
• Pains following labor
• Recurrent miscarriage
• Threatened abortion
See Materia Medica  page 172
VIPERA
Vipera berus
Key uses
• Phlebitis
• Recurrent nosebleeds
• Varicose veins 
See Materia Medica  page 172VIOLA TRI.
Viola tricolor
Key uses
• Obstinate skin problems, such as 
impetigo, rashes, eczema, rosacea,  
and pustular eruptions
• Urinary problems, such as sharp pains  
in the urethra and bed-wetting at night
See Materia Medica  page 172
See also page 193
ZINC. MET.
Zincum metallicum
Key uses
• Eczema and viral skin infections
• Headaches
• Nervous exhaustion
• T witching limbs, such as restless legs
• Urogenital problems
See Materia Medica  page 101
See also pages 230–31WYETHIA
Wyethia helenoides
Key uses
• Hay fever, with itching in the ears,  
palate, and the back of the nose,  
a scalding sensation in the mouth,  
and violent sneezing
See Materia Medica  page 173
See also page 207VINCA
Vinca minor
Key uses
• Burning leg ulcers
• Cradle cap
• Excessive menstrual flow
• Itchy , burning skin
• Warm scalp with foul-smelling eruptions 
and corrosive itching
• Weeping eczema
See Materia Medica  page 172
VISCUM ALB.
Viscum album
Key uses
• Generalized tremors and uncontrollable 
jerking after a fright
• Neuralgic pains, especially headaches
• Seizures, including petit mal and  
epilepsy that may be accompanied  
by breathing problems
• Tearing joint pains
See Materia Medica  pages 172–73
ZINGIBER
Zingiber officinale
Key uses
• Asthma
• Digestive disorders, including nausea, 
vomiting, and colicky pain in the 
abdomen, with chronic excess mucus 
production in the intestine
See Materia Medica  page 173
